The Law Of One: Book II
  THE RA MATERIAL
         By Ra,
An Humble Messenger Of
    The Law Of One
Copyright © 1982 by L/L Research which is a subsidiary of the Rock Creek
Research & Development Laboratories, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or used in any
forms or by any means—graphic, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying or information storage and retrieval systems—without written
permission from the copyright holder.
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 90-72156
ISBN: 0-945007-02-7
L/L Research
P.O. Box 5195
Louisville, KY 40255-0195
                     Table of Contents
Foreword                                    4
The Law of One, Book II, Session 27         6
The Law of One, Book II, Session 28        11
The Law of One, Book II, Session 29        17
The Law of One, Book II, Session 30       24
The Law of One, Book II, Session 31       29
The Law of One, Book II, Session 32       36
The Law of One, Book II, Session 33        41
The Law of One, Book II, Session 34       48
The Law of One, Book II, Session 35        54
The Law of One, Book II, Session 36        59
The Law of One, Book II, Session 37       65
The Law of One, Book II, Session 38       67
The Law of One, Book II, Session 39        71
The Law of One, Book II, Session 40        75
The Law of One, Book II, Session 41       80
The Law of One, Book II, Session 42        88
The Law of One, Book II, Session 43       94
The Law of One, Book II, Session 46      101
The Law of One, Book II, Session 47      104
The Law of One, Book II, Session 48      110
The Law of One, Book II, Session 49       115
The Law of One, Book II, Session 50      120




                                iii
                                 Foreword
On January 15, 1981, our research group started receiving a communication
from the social memory complex, Ra. From this communication precipitated
the Law of One and some of the distortions of the Law of One.
The pages of this book contain an exact transcript, edited only to remove
some personal material, of the communications received in Sessions 27
through 50 with Ra.
This material presupposes a point of view which we have developed in the
course of many years’ study of the UFO phenomenon. If you are not
familiar with our previous work, a reading of our book, Secrets of the UFO,
might prove helpful in understanding the present material. Book II of The
Law of One builds very carefully on concepts received during the first 26
sessions with Ra, which were published as The Law of One. We encourage
you to read The Law of One first if possible. Both books are available from
us by mail.
Book II of The Law of One concentrates on the metaphysical principles
which govern our spiritual evolution as we seek to understand and use the
catalyst of our daily experiences. A more thorough examination of the
energy centers of the body, and the connections between mind, body, and
spirit, is carried out, building upon information received in the first 26
sessions. We learn more about Wanderers, the various densities, healing,
and the many energy exchanges and blockages native to our illusion relating
to experiences such as sex, illness, and meditation.
The first three sessions of Book II (27-29) may be difficult and confusing to
anyone not familiar with the system of physics authored by Dewey B.
Larson. Don’t be discouraged, since Larsonian physics is far from well-
known. Just keep reading and by Session 30, you will be back on firm
metaphysical ground. When you’ve finished Book II, go back and take
another look at the first sessions. They’ll seem a lot clearer. For those who
may wish to study Larsonian physics, The Structure of the Physical Universe
is a good book with which to begin.
On page 52, the questioner asks about an equation and does not use the
                                                                      2
classically correct form: in the physics of special relativity, the “c ” term does
not appear. Dr. Andrija Puharich received this form of the equation in his
communication with The Nine and, therefore, we felt it appropriate to
                                   2
present it in this form, with the c term included precisely as it had been
received by Dr. Puharich.


                                        4
The Ra contact continued for 106 sessions which were printed into four
books in The Law of One series. They are available at your local bookstore,
from Whitford Press, or from us. If you wish to receive our quarterly
newsletter, in which the best of our current channeling is published, please
request that you be put on our mailing list.
L/L RESEARCH
Don Elkins
Carla L. Rueckert
James A. McCarty
Louisville, Kentucky
March 17,1982




                                      5
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 27
                           February 21, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: This session I thought we would start Book Two of THE
LAW OF ONE, which will focus on what we consider to be the only
important aspect of our being. This, I assume, will be a much more difficult
task than the first book. We want to focus on things that are not transient,
and as questioner I may have difficulty at times.
When I do have this difficulty I may fall back on some transient questions
simply because I will not be able to formulate what I really need, and I
apologize for this. I will try my best to stay on the track and eliminate
things of no value from the book if they do occur during my questioning.
The statement I will make to begin with is: In this density we tend to focus
our minds on some transient condition or activity with little regard to its
value or use as an aid or a tool for growth and understanding of the true and
undistorted essence of the creation of which we are an integral part.
I will attempt, by starting at the beginning of creation, to establish an
overview of ourselves in the creation, thereby arriving at a more informed
viewpoint of what we consider to be reality. It is hoped that this will allow
us to participate more effectively in the process of evolution.
I would like to start with definitions of words that we have been using that
possibly we have not—and possibly cannot—understand totally, but since
the first words that we use are intelligent infinity, I would like for you to
define each of these words and give the definition of their combination.
Ra: I am Ra. Your vibrations of mind complex indicate a query. However,
your vibrational sound complex indicate a preference. Please restate.
Questioner: Would you define the word intelligent in the context of
intelligent infinity?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall address the entire spectrum of this question before
defining as requested. Your language, using vibrational sound complexes,
can be at best an approximation of that which is closer to an understanding,
if you will, of the nature of conscious thought. Perceptions are not the same
as sound vibration complexes and the attempt to define will therefore be a
frustrating one for you, although we are happy to aid you within the limits
of your sound vibration complexes.

                                      6
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 27

To define intelligent apart from infinity is difficult, for these two vibration
complexes equal one concept. It is much like attempting to divide your
sound vibration concept, faith, into two parts. We shall attempt to aid you
however.
Questioner: It is not necessary to divide it. The definition of intelligent
infinity is sufficient. Could you define that please?
Ra: I am Ra. This is exponentially simpler and less confusing. There is
unity. This unity is all that there is. This unity has a potential and kinetic.
The potential is intelligent infinity. Tapping this potential will yield work.
This work has been called by us, intelligent energy.
The nature of this work is dependent upon the particular distortion of free
will which in turn is the nature of a particular intelligent energy of kinetic
focus of the potential of unity or that which is all.
Questioner: I would like to expand a little on the concept of work. In
Newtonian physics the concept of work is the product of force and distance.
I am assuming that the work of which you speak is a much broader term
including possibly work in consciousness. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. As we use this term it is universal in application. Intelligent
infinity has a rhythm or flow as of a giant heart beginning with the central
sun as you would think or conceive of this, the presence of the flow
inevitable as a tide of beingness without polarity, without finity; the vast
and silent all beating outward, outward, focusing outward and inward until
the focuses are complete. The intelligence or consciousness of foci have
reached a state where their, shall we say, spiritual nature or mass calls them
inward, inward, inward until all is coalesced. This is the rhythm of reality as
you spoke.
Questioner: Then I think I have extracted an important point from this in
that in intelligent infinity we have work without polarity, or a potential
difference does not have to exist. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no difference, potential or kinetic, in unity. The basic
rhythms of intelligent infinity are totally without distortion of any kind.
The rhythms are clothed in mystery, for they are being itself. From this
undistorted unity, however, appears a potential in relation to intelligent
energy.
In this way you may observe the term to be somewhat two-sided, one use of
the term, that being as the undistorted unity, being without any kinetic or
potential side. The other application of this term, which we use


                                       7
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 27

undifferentiatedly for lack of other terms in the sense of the vast potential
tapped into by foci or focuses of energy, we call intelligent energy.
Questioner: I understand that the first distortion of intelligent infinity is
the distortion of what we call free will. Can you give me a definition of this
distortion?
Ra: I am Ra. In this distortion of the Law of One it is recognized that the
Creator will know Itself.
Questioner: Then am I correct in assuming that the Creator then grants for
this knowing the concept of total freedom of choice in the ways of
knowing? Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: This then being the first distortion of the Law of One, which I
am assuming is the Law of Intelligent Infinity, all other distortions which
are the total experience of the creation spring from this. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is both correct and incorrect. In your illusion all
experience springs from the Law of Free Will or the Way of Confusion. In
another sense, which we are learning, the experiences are this distortion.
Questioner: I will have to think about that and ask questions on it in the
next session, so I will go on now to what you have given me as the second
distortion which is the distortion of love. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I would like for you to define love in its sense as the second
distortion.
Ra: I am Ra. This must be defined against the background of intelligent
infinity or unity or the one Creator with the primal distortion of free will.
The term Love then may be seen as the focus, the choice of attack, the type
of energy of an extremely, shall we say, high order which causes intelligent
energy to be formed from the potential of intelligent infinity in just such
and such a way. This then may be seen to be an object rather than an
activity by some of your peoples, and the principle of this extremely strong
energy focus being worshipped as the Creator instead of unity or oneness
from which all Loves emanate.
Questioner: Is there a manifestation of love that we could call vibration?
Ra: I am Ra. Again we reach semantic difficulties. The vibration or density
of love or understanding is not a term used in the same sense as the second
distortion, Love; the distortion Love being the great activator and primal

                                       8
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 27

co-Creator of various creations using intelligent infinity; the vibration love
being that density in which those who have learned to do an activity called
“loving” without significant distortion, then seek the ways of light or
wisdom. Thus in vibratory sense love comes into light in the sense of the
activity of unity in its free will. Love uses light and has the power to direct
light in its distortions. Thus vibratory complexes recapitulate in reverse the
creation in its unity, thus showing the rhythm or flow of the great
heartbeat, if you will use this analogy.
Questioner: I will make a statement that I have extracted from the physics
of Dewey Larson which may or may not be close to what we are trying to
explain. Larson says that all is motion which we can take as vibration, and
that vibration is pure vibration and is not physical in any way or in any
form or density, and the first product of that vibration is what we call the
photon or particle of light. I am trying to make an analogy between this
physical solution and the concept of love and light. Is this close to the
concept of Love creating light?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct.
Questioner: Then I will expand a bit more on this concept. We have the
infinite vibration of Love which can occur, I am assuming, at varying
frequencies.
I would assume that it begins at one basic frequency. Does this have any
meaning?
Ra: I am Ra. Each Love, as you term the prime movers, comes from one
frequency, if you wish to use this term. This frequency is unity. We would
perhaps liken it rather to a strength than a frequency, this strength being
infinite, the finite qualities being chosen by the particular nature of this
primal movement.
Questioner: Then this vibration which is, for lack of better understanding,
pure motion; it is pure love; it is nothing that is yet condensed, shall we say,
to form any type of density of illusion. This Love then creates by this
process of vibration a photon, as we call it, which is the basic particle of
light. This photon then, by added vibrations and rotation, further
condenses into particles of the densities we experience. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then this light which forms the densities has what we call
color. This color is divided into seven categories. Can you tell me if there is
a reason or explanation for these categories of color?


                                       9
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 27

Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last complete question of this session as this
instrument is low on vital energy. We will answer briefly and then you may
question further in subsequent sessions.
The nature of the vibratory patterns of your universe is dependent upon the
configurations placed upon the original material or light by the focus or
Love using Its intelligent energy to create a certain pattern of illusions or
densities in order to satisfy Its own intelligent estimate of a method of
knowing Itself. Thus the colors, as you call them, are as straight, or narrow,
or necessary as is possible to express, given the will of Love.
There is further information which we shall be happy to share by answering
your questions. However, we do not wish to deplete this instrument. Is
there a short query necessary before we leave?
Questioner: The only thing I need to know is if there is anything that we
can do to make the instrument more comfortable or to help her or this
contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is slightly uncomfortable. Perhaps a simpler
configuration of the body would be appropriate given the instrument’s
improving physical complex condition.
I am Ra. You are conscientious in your endeavors. We shall be with you.
We leave you now in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Rejoice, therefore, in the power and the peace of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                      10
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 28
                           February 22, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: I may be backtracking a little today because I think that
possibly we are at the most important part of what we are doing in trying to
make it apparent how everything is one, how it comes from one intelligent
infinity. This is difficult, so please bear with my errors in questioning.
The concept that I have right now of the process, using both what you have
told me and some of Dewey Larson’s material having to do with the physics
of the process, is that intelligent infinity expands outward from all locations
everywhere. It expands outward uniformly like the surface of a bubble or a
balloon expanding outward from every point everywhere. It expands
outward at what is called unit velocity or the velocity of light. This is
Larson’s idea of the progression of what he calls space/time. Is this concept
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This concept is incorrect as is any concept of the one
intelligent infinity. This concept is correct in the context of one particular
Logos, or Love, or focus of this Creator which has chosen Its, shall we say,
natural laws and ways of expressing them mathematically and otherwise.
The one undifferentiated intelligent infinity, unpolarized, full and whole, is
the macrocosm of the mystery-clad being. We are messengers of the Law of
One. Unity, at this approximation of understanding, cannot be specified by
any physics but only become activated or potentiated intelligent infinity due
to the catalyst of free will. This may be difficult to accept. However, the
understandings we have to share begin and end in mystery.
Questioner: Yesterday we had arrived at a point where we were considering
colors of light. You said: “The nature of the vibratory patterns of your
universe is dependent upon the configurations placed upon the original
material or light by the focus or Love using Its intelligent energy to create a
certain pattern of illusions or densities in order to satisfy Its own intelligent
estimate of a method of knowing Itself.” Then after this you said that there
was more material that you would be happy to share, but we ran out of
time. Could you give us further information on that?
Ra: I am Ra. In discussing this information we then, shall we say, snap back
into the particular methods of understanding or seeing that which the one,
sound vibration complex, Dewey, offers; this being correct for the second

                                        11
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 28

meaning of intelligent infinity: the potential which then through catalyst
forms the kinetic.
This information is a natural progression of inspection of the kinetic shape
of your environment. You may understand each color or ray as being, as we
had said, a very specific and accurate portion of intelligent energy’s
representation of intelligent infinity, each ray having been previously
inspected in other regards .
This information may be of aid here. We speak now nonspecifically to
increase the depth of your conceptualization of the nature of what is. The
universe in which you live is recapitulation in each part of intelligent
infinity. Thus you will see the same patterns repeated in physical and
metaphysical areas; the rays or portions of light being, as you surmise, those
areas of what you may call the physical illusion which rotate, vibrate, or are
of a nature that may be, shall we say, counted or categorized in rotation
manner in space/time as described by the one known as Dewey; some
substances having various of the rays in a physical manifestation visible to
the eye, this being apparent in the nature of your crystallized minerals
which you count as precious, the ruby being red and so forth.
Questioner: This light occurred as a consequence of vibration which is a
consequence of Love. I am going to ask if that statement is correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement is correct.
Questioner: This light then can condense into material as we know it into
our density, into all of our chemical elements because of rotations of the
vibration at quantized units or intervals of angular velocity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: Thank you. I am wondering, what is the catalyst or the
activator of the rotation? What causes the rotation so that light condenses
into our physical or chemical elements?
Ra: I am Ra. It is necessary to consider the enabling function of the focus
known as Love. This energy is of an ordering nature. It orders in a
cumulative way from greater to lesser so that when Its universe, as you may
call it, is complete, the manner of development of each detail is inherent in
the living light and thus will develop in such and such a way; your own
universe having been well-studied in an empirical fashion by those you call
your scientists and having been understood or visualized, shall we say, with
greater accuracy by the understandings or visualizations of the one known as
Dewey.


                                       12
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 28

Questioner: When does the individualization or the individualized portion
of consciousness come into play? At what point does individualized
consciousness take over working on the basic light?
Ra: I am Ra. You remain carefully in the area of creation itself. In this
process we must further confuse you by stating that the process by which
free will acts upon potential intelligent infinity to become focused
intelligent energy takes place without the space/time of which you are so
aware as it is your continuum experience.
The experience or existence of space/time comes into being after the
individuation process of Logos or Love has been completed and the physical
universe, as you would call it, has coalesced or begun to draw inward while
moving outward to the extent that that which you call your sun bodies have
in their turn created timeless chaos coalescing into what you call planets,
these vortices of intelligent energy spending a large amount of what you
would call first density in a timeless state, the space/time realization being
one of the learn/teachings of this density of being-ness.
Thus we have difficulty answering your questions with regard to time and
space and their relationship to the, what you would call, original creation
which is not a part of space/time as you can understand it.
Questioner: Thank you. Does a unit of consciousness, an individualized
unit of consciousness, create a unit of the creation? I will give an example.
One individualized consciousness creates one galaxy of stars, the type that
has many millions of stars in it. Does this happen?
Ra: I am Ra. This can happen. The possibilities are infinite. Thus a Logos
may create what you call a star system or it may be the Logos creating
billions of star systems. This is the cause of the confusion in the term
galaxy, for there are many different Logos entities or creations and we
would call each, using your sound vibration complexes, a galaxy.
Questioner: Let’s take as an example the planet that we are on now and tell
me how much of the creation was created by the same Logos that created
this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. This planetary Logos is a strong Logos creating approximately
250 billion of your star systems for Its creation. The, shall we say, laws or
physical ways of this creation will remain, therefore, constant.
Questioner: Then what you are saying is that the lenticular star system
which we call a galaxy that we find ourselves in with approximately 250
billion other suns like our own was created by a single Logos. Is this correct?

                                      13
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 28

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Since there are many individualized portions of consciousness
in this lenticular galaxy, did this Logos then subdivide into more
individualization of consciousness to create these consciousnesses?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive. This is also correct although an apparent
paradox.
Questioner: Could you tell me what you mean by an apparent paradox?
Ra: I am Ra. It would seem that if one Logos creates the intelligent energy
ways for a large system there would not be the necessity or possibility of the
further sub-Logos differentiation. However, within limits, this is precisely
the case, and it is perceptive that this has been seen.
Questioner: Thank you. I’ll call the lenticular galaxy that we are in the
major galaxy just so we will not get mixed up in our terms. Does all the
consciousness in individualized form that goes into what we are calling the
major galaxy start out and go through all of the densities in order, one-two-
three-four-five-six-seven and into the eighth, or are there some who start up
higher in the rank so that there is always a mixture of intelligent
consciousness in the galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. The latter is more nearly correct. In each beginning there is
the beginning from infinite strength. Free will acts as a catalyst. Beings
begin to form the universes. Consciousness then begins to have the
potential to experience. The potentials of experience are created as a part of
intelligent energy and are fixed before experience begins.
However, there is always, due to free will acting infinitely upon the
creation, a great variation in initial responses to intelligent energy’s
potential. Thus almost immediately the foundations of the, shall we call it,
hierarchical nature of beings begins to manifest as some portions of
consciousness or awareness learn through experience in a much more
efficient manner.
Questioner: Is there any reason for some portions being much more
efficient in learning?
Ra: I am Ra. Is there any reason for some to learn more quickly than others?
Look, if you wish, to the function of the will … the, shall we say, attraction
to the upward spiraling line of light.
Questioner: I am assuming that there are eight densities created when this
major galaxy was created. Is this correct?


                                      14
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 28

Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct. However, it is well to perceive that
the eighth density functions also as the beginning density or first density, in
its latter stages, of the next octave of densities.
Questioner: Are you saying then that there are an infinite number of
octaves of densities one through eight?
Ra: I am Ra. We wish to establish that we are truly humble messengers of
the Law of One. We can speak to you of our experiences and our
understandings and teach/learn in limited ways. However, we cannot speak
in firm knowledge of all the creations. We know only that they are infinite.
We assume an infinite number of octaves.
However, it has been impressed upon us by our own teachers that there is a
mystery-clad unity of creation in which all consciousness periodically
coalesces and again begins. Thus we can only say we assume an infinite
progression though we understand it to be cyclical in nature and, as we have
said, clad in mystery.
Questioner: Thank you. When this major galaxy is formed by the Logos,
polarity then exists in a sense that we have electrical polarity. We do have
electrical polarity existing at that time. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. I accept this as correct with the stipulation that what you term
electrical be understood as not only the one, Larson, stipulated its meaning
but also in what you would call the metaphysical sense.
Questioner: Are you saying then that we have not only a polarity of
electrical charge but also a polarity in consciousness at that time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. All is potentially available from the beginning
of your physical space/time; it then being the function of consciousness
complexes to begin to use the physical materials to gain experience to then
polarize in a metaphysical sense. The potentials for this are not created by
the experiencer but by intelligent energy.
This will be the last full question of this session due to our desire to foster
this instrument as it slowly regains physical complex energy. May we ask if
you have one or two questions we may answer shortly before we close?
Questioner: I am assuming that the process of creation, after the original
creation of the major galaxy, is continued by the further individualization of
the consciousness of the Logos so that there are many, many portions of the
individualized consciousness creating further items for experience all over
the galaxy. Is this correct?



                                       15
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 28

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, for within the, shall we say, guidelines or ways
of the Logos, the sub-Logos may find various means of differentiating
experiences without removing or adding to these ways.
Questioner: Thank you. And since we are out of time I will ask if there is
anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable or to
help the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is well adjusted. You are conscientious.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth then rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
Creator. Adonai.




                                      16
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 29
                            February 23, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: Is our sun a sub-Logos or the physical manifestation of a sub-
Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then I am assuming that this sub-Logos created this planetary
system in all of its densities. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The sub-Logos of your solar entity
differentiated some experiential components within the patterns of
intelligent energy set in motion by the Logos which created the basic
conditions and vibratory rates consistent throughout your, what you have
called, major galaxy.
Questioner: Then is this sub-Logos which is our sun the same sub-Logos
just manifesting in different parts through the galaxy, or is it all the stars in
the galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. Please restate.
Questioner: What I’m saying is that there are roughly 250 billion stars
somewhat like ours in this major galaxy. Are they all part of the same sub-
Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. They are all part of the same Logos. Your solar system, as you
would call it, is a manifestation somewhat and slightly different due to the
presence of a sub-Logos.
Questioner: Let me be sure I’m right then. Our sun is a sub-Logos of the
Logos of the major galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Are there any sub-sub-Logoi that are found in our planetary
system that are “sub” to our sun?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Would you give me an example of what I will call a sub-sub-
Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. One example is your mind/body/spirit complex.

                                        17
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

Questioner: Then every entity that exists would be some type of sub or sub-
sub-Logos. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct down to the limits of any observation, for the
entire creation is alive.
Questioner: Then the planet which we walk upon here would be some
form of sub-sub-Logos. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. A planetary entity is so named only as Logos if It is working in
harmonic fashion with entities or mind/body complexes upon Its surface or
within Its electromagnetic field.
Questioner: Do the sub-Logoi such as our sun have a metaphysical polarity
positive or negative as we have been using the term?
Ra: I am Ra. As you use the term, this is not so. Entities through the level of
planetary have the strength of intelligent infinity through the use of free
will, going through the actions of beingness. The polarity is not thusly as
you understand polarity. It is only when the planetary sphere begins
harmonically interacting with mind/body complexes, and more especially
mind/body/spirit complexes, that planetary spheres take on distortions due
to the thought complexes of entities interacting with the planetary entity.
The creation of the one infinite Creator does not have the polarity you
speak of.
Questioner: Thank you. Yesterday you stated that planets in first density
are in a timeless state to begin with. Can you tell me how the effect that we
appreciate as time comes into being?
Ra: I am Ra. We have just described to you the state of beingness of each
Logos. The process by which space/time comes into continuum form is a
function of the careful building, shall we say, of an entire or whole plan of
vibratory rates, densities, and potentials. When this plan has coalesced in
the thought complexes of Love, then the physical manifestations begin to
appear; this first manifestation stage being awareness or consciousness.
At the point at which this coalescence is at the living-ness or being-ness
point, the point or fountainhead of beginning, space/time then begins to
unroll its scroll of living-ness.
Questioner: I believe that Love creates the vibration in space/time in order
to form the photon. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is essentially correct.
Questioner: Then the continued application of Love—I will assume that
this is directed by a sub-Logos or a sub-sub-Logos—creates rotations of
                                       18
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

these vibrations which are in discrete units of angular velocity. This then
creates chemical elements in our physical illusion and I will assume the
elements in the nonphysical or other densities in the illusion. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The Logos creates all densities. Your question was unclear.
However, we shall state the Logos does create both the space/time densities
and the accompanying time/space densities.
Questioner: What I am assuming is that quantized incremental rotations of
the vibrations show up as a material of these densities. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is essentially correct.
Questioner: Then because of these rotations there is an inward motion of
these particles which is opposite the direction of space/time progression as I
understand it, and this inward progression then is seen by us as what we call
gravity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Can you tell me how the gravity comes about?
Ra: I am Ra. This that you speak of as gravity may be seen as the pressing
towards the inner light/love, the seeking towards the spiral line of light
which progresses towards the Creator. This is a manifestation of a spiritual
event or condition of living-ness.
Questioner: The gravity that we know of on our moon is less than it is on
our planet. Is there a metaphysical principle behind this that you could
explain?
Ra: I am Ra. The metaphysical and physical are inseparable. Thus that of
which you spoke which attempts to explain this phenomenon is able to,
shall we say, calculate the gravitational force of most objects due to the
various physical aspects such as what you know of as mass. However, we felt
it was necessary to indicate the corresponding and equally important
metaphysical nature of gravity.
Questioner: I sometimes have difficulty in getting a foothold into what I
am looking for. I am trying to seek out the metaphysical principles, you
might say, behind our physical illusion.
Could you give me an example of the amount of gravity in the third density
conditions at the surface of the planet Venus? Would it be greater or less
than Earth’s?
Ra: I am Ra. The gravity, shall we say, the attractive force which we also
describe as the pressing outward force towards the Creator is greater

                                       19
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

spiritually upon the entity you call Venus due to the greater degree of
success, shall we say, at seeking the Creator.
This point only becomes important when you consider that when all of
creation in its infinity has reached a spiritual gravitational mass of sufficient
nature, the entire creation infinitely coalesces; the light seeking and finding
its source and thusly ending the creation and beginning a new creation
much as you consider the black hole, as you call it, with its conditions of
infinitely great mass at the zero point from which no light may be seen as it
has been absorbed.
Questioner: Then the black hole would be a point at which the
environmental material has succeeded in uniting with unity or with the
Creator? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The black hole which manifests third density is the physical
complex manifestation of this spiritual or metaphysical state. This is correct.
Questioner: Then when our planet is fully into fourth density, will there be
a greater gravity?
Ra: I am Ra. There will be a greater spiritual gravity thus causing a denser
illusion.
Questioner: This denser illusion then I would assume increases gravitational
acceleration above the 32 feet per second squared that we experience. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your entities do not have the instrumentation to measure
spiritual gravity but only to observe a few of its extreme manifestations.
Questioner: This I know, that we can’t measure spiritual gravity, but I was
just wondering if the physical effect could be measured as an increase in the
gravitational constant? That was my question.
Ra: I am Ra. The increase measurable by existing instrumentation would
and will be statistical in nature only and not significant.
Questioner: OK. As the creation is formed, as the atoms form as rotations
of the vibration which is light, they coalesce in a certain manner sometimes.
They produce a lattice structure which we call crystalline. I am guessing that
because of the formation from intelligent energy of the precise crystalline
structure that it is possible by some technique to tap intelligent energy and
bring it into the physical illusion by working through the crystalline
structure. Is this correct?



                                       20
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct only in so far as the crystalline physical
structure is charged by a correspondingly crystallized or regularized or
balanced mind/body/spirit complex.
Questioner: I don’t wish to get off on subjects of no importance, but it is
difficult sometimes to see precisely in what direction to go. I would like to
investigate a little bit more this idea of crystals, how they are used. I am
assuming then from what you said that in order to use the crystal to tap
intelligent energy, it is necessary to have a partially undistorted
mind/body/spirit complex. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is specifically correct.
Questioner: There must be a point at which the removal of distortion
reaches the minimum for use of the crystal in tapping intelligent energy. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct only if it is understood, shall we say, that each
mind/body/spirit complex has an unique such point.
Questioner: Can you tell me why each mind/body/spirit complex has this
unique point of distortion-ridding?
Ra: I am Ra. Each mind/body/spirit complex is an unique portion of the
one Creator.
Questioner: Then you are saying that there is no single level of purity
required to tap intelligent energy through crystals but there can be a wide
variation in the amount of distortion that an entity may have, but each
entity has to reach his particular point of what I might call energizing the
ability. Is this right?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The necessity is for the mind/body/spirit
complex to be of a certain balance, this balance thus enabling it to reach a
set level of lack of distortion. The critical difficulties are unique for each
mind/body/spirit complex due to the experiential distillations which in total
are the, shall we say, violet-ray being-ness of each such entity.
This balance is what is necessary for work to be done in seeking the gateway
to intelligent infinity through the use of crystals or through any other use.
No two mind/body/spirit crystallized natures are the same. The distortion
requirements, vibrationally speaking, are set.
Questioner: I see. Then if you are able to read the violet ray of an entity, to
see that ray, is it possible to immediately determine whether the entity
could use crystals to tap intelligent energy?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible for one of fifth density or above to do this.
                                       21
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

Questioner: Is it possible for you to tell me how an entity who has
satisfactorily achieved the necessary violet ray qualification should use the
crystal?
Ra: I am Ra. The gateway to intelligent infinity is born of, shall we say, the
sympathetic vibration in balanced state accompanying the will to serve, the
will to seek.
Questioner: Can you tell me precisely what the entity would do with the
crystal to use it for the purpose of seeking the intelligent infinity?
Ra: I am Ra. The use of the crystal in physical manifestation is that use
wherein the entity of crystalline nature charges the regularized physical
crystal with this seeking, thus enabling it to vibrate harmonically and also
become the catalyst or gateway whereby intelligent infinity may thus
become intelligent energy, this crystal serving as an analog of the violet ray
of the mind/body/spirit in relatively undistorted form.
Questioner: Is it possible for you to instruct us in the specific uses of
crystals?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible. There are, we consider, things which are not
efficacious to tell you due to possible infringement upon your free will.
Entities of the Confederation have done this in the past. The uses of the
crystal, as you know, include the uses for healing, for power, and even for
the development of life-forms. We feel that it is unwise to offer instruction
at this time as your peoples have shown a tendency to use peaceful sources
of power for disharmonious reasons.
Questioner: Is it possible for you to give me an example of various planetary
developments in what I would call a metaphysical sense having to do with
the development of consciousness and its polarities throughout the galaxy?
In other words I believe that some of these planets develop quite rapidly
into higher density planets and some take longer times. Can you give me
some idea of that development?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final full query of this session.
The particular Logos of your major galaxy has used a large portion of Its
coalesced material to reflect the being-ness of the Creator. In this way there
is much of your galactic system which does not have the progression of
which you speak but dwells spiritually as a portion of the Logos. Of those
entities upon which consciousness dwells there is, as you surmise, a variety
of time/space periods during which the higher densities of experience are
attained by consciousness.
Is there any short query further before we close?
                                       22
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 29

Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. The entity is well aligned
I am Ra. I leave you now in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the
One infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     23
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 30
                           February 24, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I am going to make a statement and then let you correct it if I
have made any errors. This is the statement: Creation is a single entity or
unity. If only a single entity exists, then the only concept of service is the
concept of service to self. If this single entity subdivides, then the concept of
service of one of its parts to one of its other parts is born. From this springs
the equality of service to self or to others. It would seem that as the Logos
subdivided, parts would select each orientation. As individualized entities
emerge in space/time then I would assume that they have polarity. Is this
statement correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement is quite perceptive and correct until the final
phrase in which we note that the polarities begin to be explored only at the
point when a third density entity becomes aware of the possibility of choice
between the concept or distortion of service to self or service to others. This
marks the end of what you may call the unself-conscious or innocent phase
of conscious awareness.
Questioner: Thank you. Would you define mind, body, and spirit
separately?
Ra: I am Ra. These terms are all simplistic descriptive terms which equal a
complex of energy focuses; the body, as you call it, being the material of the
density which you experience at a given space/time or time/space; this
complex of materials being available for distortions of what you would call
physical manifestation.
The mind is a complex which reflects the in-pourings of the spirit and the
up-pourings of the body complex. It contains what you know as feelings,
emotions, and intellectual thoughts in its more conscious complexities.
Moving further down the tree of mind we see the intuition which is of the
nature of the mind more in contact or in tune with the total being-ness
complex. Moving down to the roots of mind we find the progression of
consciousness which gradually turns from the personal to the racial
memory, to the cosmic influxes, and thus becomes a direct contactor of that
shuttle which we call the spirit complex.
This spirit complex is the channel whereby the in-pourings from all of the
various universal, planetary, and personal inpourings may be funneled into

                                       24
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 30

the roots of consciousness and whereby consciousness may be funneled to
the gateway of intelligent infinity through the balanced intelligent energy of
body and mind.
You will see by this series of definitive statements that mind, body, and
spirit are inextricably intertwined and cannot continue, one without the
other. Thus we refer to the mind/body/spirit complex rather than
attempting to deal with them separately, for the work, shall we say, that you
do during your experiences is done through the interaction of these three
components, not through any one.
Questioner: Upon our physical death, as we call it, from this particular
density and this particular incarnative experience, we lose this chemical
body. Immediately after the loss of this chemical body do we maintain a
different type of body? Is there still a mind/body/spirit complex at that
point?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The mind/body/spirit complex is quite intact;
the physical body complex you now associate with the term body being but
manifestation of a more dense and intelligently informed and powerful
body complex.
Questioner: Is there any loss to the mind or spirit after this transition which
we call death or any impairment of either because of the loss of this
chemical body which we now have?
Ra: I am Ra. In your terms there is a great loss of mind complex due to the
fact that much of the activity of the mental nature of which you are aware
during the experience of this space/time continuum is as much of a surface
illusion as is the chemical body complex.
In other terms nothing whatever of importance is lost; the character or, shall
we say, pure distortion of emotions and biases or distortions and wisdoms,
if you will, becoming obvious for the first time, shall we say; these pure
emotions and wisdoms and bias/distortions being, for the most part, either
ignored or underestimated during physical life experience.
In terms of the spiritual, this channel is then much opened due to the lack
of necessity for the forgetting characteristic of third density.
Questioner: I would like to know how the mind/body/spirit complexes
originate, going as far back as necessary. How does the origination occur?
Do they originate by spirit forming mind and mind forming body? Can you
tell me this?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask you to consider that you are attempting to trace
evolution. This evolution is as we have previously described, the
                                      25
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 30

consciousness being first, in first density, without movement, a random
thing. Whether you may call this mind or body complex is a semantic
problem. We call it mind/body complex recognizing always that in the
simplest iota of this complex exists in its entirety the one infinite Creator;
this mind/body complex then in second density discovering the growing
and turning towards the light, thus awakening what you may call the spirit
complex, that which intensifies the upward spiraling towards the love and
light of the infinite Creator.
The addition of this spirit complex, though apparent rather than real, it
having existed potentially from the beginning of space/time, perfects itself
by graduation into third density, When the mind/body/spirit complex
becomes aware of the possibility of service to self or other-self, then the
mind/body/spirit complex is activated.
Questioner: Thank you. I don’t wish to cover ground that we have covered
before but it sometimes is helpful to restate these concepts for complete
clarity since words are a poor tool for what we do.
Just as a passing point, I was wondering—on this planet during the second
density I believe there was habitation during the same space/time of bipedal
entities and what we call the dinosaurs. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: These two types of entities seemed to be very incompatible,
you might say, with each other. I don’t know, but can you tell me the
reason for both types of entities inhabiting the same space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider the workings of free will as applied to evolution.
There are paths that the mind/body complex follows in an attempt to
survive, to reproduce, and to seek in its fashion that which is unconsciously
felt as the potential for growth; these two arenas or paths of development
being two among many.
Questioner: In second density the concept of bisexual reproduction first
originates. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me the philosophy behind this method of
propagation of the bodily complex?
Ra: I am Ra. The second density is one in which the groundwork is being
laid for third density work. In this way it may be seen that the basic
mechanism of reproduction capitulates into a vast potential in third density
for service to other-self and to self; this being not only by the functions of

                                      26
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 30

energy transfer, but also by the various services performed due to the close
contact of those who are, shall we say, magnetically attracted, one to the
other; these entities thus having the opportunities for many types of service
which would be unavailable to the independent entity.
Questioner: Was the basic reason for this to increase the opportunity of the
experience of the one Creator?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not merely correct but is the key to that which occurs
in all densities.
Questioner: Does the process of bisexual reproduction or the philosophy of
it play a part in the spiritual growth of second density entities?
Ra: I am Ra. In isolated instances this is so due to efficient perceptions
upon the part of entities or species. For the greater part, by far, this is not
the case in second density, the spiritual potentials being those of third
density.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you give me a brief history of the
metaphysical principles of the development of each of our planets that
surround our sun, their function with respect to the evolution of beings?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall give you a metaphysical description only of those
planets upon which individual mind/body/spirit complexes have been, are,
or shall be experienced. You may understand the other spheres to be a part
of the Logos.
We take the one known as Venus. This planetary sphere was one of rapid
evolution. It is our native earth and the rapidity of the progress of the
mind/body/spirit complexes upon its surface was due to harmonious
interaction.
Upon the entity known to you as Mars, as you have already discussed, this
entity was stopped in mid-third density, thus being unable to continue in
progression due to the lack of hospitable conditions upon the surface. This
planet shall be undergoing healing for some of your space/time millennia.
The planet which you dwell upon has a metaphysical history well known to
you and you may ask about it if you wish. However, we have spoken to a
great degree upon this subject.
The planet known as Saturn has a great affinity for the infinite intelligence
and thus it has been dwelled upon in its magnetic fields of time/space by
those who wish to protect your system.
The planetary entity known to you as Uranus is slowly moving through the
first density and has the potential of moving through all densities.
                                       27
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 30

Questioner: Thank you. You stated yesterday that much of this major
galactic system dwells spiritually as a part of the Logos. Do you mean that
near the center of this major galactic system that the stars there do not have
planetary systems? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The Logos has distributed itself throughout
your galactic system. However, the time/space continua of some of your
more central sun systems are much further advanced.
Questioner: Well then, could you generally say that as you get closer to the
center of this major system that there is a greater spiritual density or
spiritual quality in that area?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this session as this
instrument is somewhat uncomfortable. We do not wish to deplete the
instrument.
The spiritual density or mass of those more towards the center of your
galaxy is known. However, this is due simply to the varying timelessness
states during which the planetary spheres may coalesce, this process of
space/time beginnings occurring earlier, shall we say, as you approach the
center of the galactic spiral.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: This instrument is well balanced and the contact is as it should be. This
instrument has certain difficulties of a distortion you would call the
muscular spasm, thus making the motionless position uncomfortable. Thus
we leave the instrument.
I am Ra. You are doing well, my friends. I leave you in the love and the
light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and
the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      28
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 31
                           February 25, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I have a question that the instrument has asked me to ask. It
reads: You speak of various types of energy blockages and transfers, positive
and negative, that may take place due to participation in our sexual
reproductive complex of actions. Could you please explain these blockages
and energy transfers with emphasis upon what an individual who is seeking
to be in accordance with the Law of One may positively do in this area? Is it
possible for you to answer this question?
Ra: I am Ra. It is partially possible, given the background we have laid. This
is properly a more advanced question. Due to the specificity of the question
we may give a general answer.
The first energy transfer is red ray. It is a random transfer having to do only
with your reproductive system.
The orange and the yellow ray attempts to have sexual intercourse create,
firstly, a blockage if only one entity vibrates in this area, thus causing the
entity vibrating sexually in this area to have a never-ending appetite for this
activity. What these vibratory levels are seeking is green ray activity. There is
the possibility of orange or yellow ray energy transfer; this being polarizing
towards the negative: one being seen as object rather than otherself; the
other seeing itself as plunderer or master of the situation.
In green ray there are two possibilities. Firstly, if both vibrate in green ray
there will be a mutually strengthening energy transfer, the negative or
female, as you call it, drawing the energy from the roots of the being-ness
through the energy centers, thus being physically revitalized; the positive, or
male polarity, as it is deemed in your illusion, finding in its energy transfer
an inspiration which satisfies and feeds the spirit portion of the
body/mind/spirit complex, thus both being polarized and releasing the
excess of that which each has in abundance by nature of intelligent energy,
that is, negative/intuitive, positive/physical energies as you may call them;
this energy transfer being blocked only if one or both entities have fear of
possession or of being possessed, of desiring possession or desiring being
possessed.
The other green ray possibility is that of one entity offering green ray
energy, the other not offering energy of the universal love energy, this

                                       29
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

resulting in a blockage of energy for the one not green ray thus increasing
frustration or appetite; the green ray being polarizing slightly towards
service to others.
The blue ray energy transfer is somewhat rare among your people at this
time but is of great aid due to energy transfers involved in becoming able to
express the self without reservation or fear.
The indigo ray transfer is extremely rare among your people. This is the
sacramental portion of the body complex whereby contact may be made
through violet ray with intelligent infinity. No blockages may occur at these
latter two levels due to the fact that if both entities are not ready for this
energy it is not visible and neither transfer nor blockage may take place. It is
as though the distributor were removed from a powerful engine.
Questioner: Could you define sexual energy transfer and expand upon its
meaning, please?
Ra: I am Ra. Energy transfer implies the release of potential energies across,
shall we say, a potentiated space. The sexual energy transfers occur due to
the polarizations of two mind/body/spirit complexes, each of which have
some potential difference one to the other. The nature of the transfer of
energy or of the blockage of this energy is then a function of the interaction
of these two potentials. In the cases where transfer takes place, you may
liken this to a circuit being closed. You may also see this activity, as all
experiential activities, as the Creator experiencing Itself.
Questioner: Could this then be the primal mechanism for the Creator to
experience Itself?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a proper term. Perhaps the adjectives would be
“one appropriate” way of the Creator knowing Itself, for in each interaction,
no matter what the distortion, the Creator is experiencing Itself. The
bisexual knowing of the Creator by Itself has the potential for two
advantages.
Firstly, in the green ray activated being there is the potential for a direct and
simple analog of what you may call joy, the spiritual or metaphysical nature
which exists in intelligent energy. This is a great aid to comprehension of a
truer nature of being-ness. The other potential advantage of bisexual
reproductive acts is the possibility of a sacramental understanding or
connection, shall we say, with the gateway to intelligent infinity, for with
appropriate preparation, work in what you may call magic may be done and
experiences of intelligent infinity may be had. The positively oriented
individuals concentrating upon this method of reaching intelligent infinity,
then, through the seeking or the act of will, are able to direct this infinite
                                       30
                  The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

intelligence to the work these entities desire to do, whether it be knowledge
of service or ability to heal or whatever service to others is desired .
These are two advantages of this particular method of the Creator
experiencing Itself. As we have said before, the corollary of the strength of
this particular energy transfer is that it opens the door, shall we say, to the
individual mind/body/spirit complexes’ desire to serve in an infinite
number of ways an otherself, thus polarizing towards positive.
Questioner: Can you expand somewhat on the concept that this action not
only allows the Creator to know Itself better but also creates, in our density,
an offspring or makes available the pathway for another entity to enter this
density?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have previously said, the sexual energy transfers include
the red ray transfer which is random and which is a function of the second-
density attempt to grow, to survive, shall we say. This is a proper function
of the sexual interaction. The offspring, as you call the incarnated entity,
takes on the mind/body complex opportunity offered by this random act or
event called the fertilization of egg by seed which causes an entity to have
the opportunity to then enter this density as an incarnate entity.
This gives the two who were engaged in this bisexual reproductive energy
transfer the potential for great service in this area of the nurturing of the
small-experienced entity as it gains in experience.
It shall be of interest at this point to note that there is always the possibility
of using these opportunities to polarize towards the negative, and this has
been aided by the gradual building up over many thousands of your years of
social complex distortions which create a tendency towards confusion, shall
we say, or baffling of the service to others aspect of this energy transfer and
subsequent opportunities for service to other selves.
Questioner: If a sexual energy transfer occurs in green ray—and I am
assuming in this case that there is no red ray energy transfer—does this
mean it is impossible for this particular transfer to include fertilization and
the birthing of an entity?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. There is always the red ray energy transfer
due to the nature of the body complex. The random result of this energy
transfer will be as it will be, as a function of the possibility of fertilization at
a given time in a given pairing of entities each entity being undistorted in
any vital sense by the yellow or orange ray energies; thus the gift, shall we
say, being given freely, no payment being requested either of the body, of
the mind, or of the spirit. The green ray is one of complete universality of
love. This is a giving without expectation of return.
                                         31
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

Questioner: I was wondering if there was some principle behind the fact
that a sexual union does not necessarily lead to fertilization. I’m not
interested in the chemical or physical principles of it. I’m interested in
whether or not there is some metaphysical principle that leads to the couple
having a child or not, or is it purely random?
Ra: I am Ra. This is random within certain limits. If an entity has reached
the seniority whereby it chooses the basic structure of the life experience,
this entity may then choose to incarnate in a physical complex which is not
capable of reproduction. Thus we find some entities which have chosen to
be unfertile. Other entities, through free will, make use of various devices to
insure nonfertility. Except for these conditions, the condition is random.
Questioner: Thank you. In the previous material you mentioned “magnetic
attraction.” Would you define and expand upon that term?
Ra: I am Ra. We used the term to indicate that in your bisexual natures
there is that which is of polarity. This polarity may be seen to be variable
according to the, shall we say, male/female polarization of each entity, be
each entity biologically male or female. Thus you may see the magnetism
which two entities with the appropriate balance, male/female versus
female/male polarity, meeting and thus feeling the attraction which
polarized forces will exert, one upon the other.
This is the strength of the bisexual mechanism. It does not take an act of
will to decide to feel attraction for one who is oppositely polarized sexually.
It will occur in an inevitable sense giving the free flow of energy a proper,
shall we say, avenue. This avenue may be blocked by some distortion
toward a belief/condition stating to the entity that this attraction is not
desired. However, the basic mechanism functions as simply as would, shall
we say, the magnet and the iron.
Questioner: We have what seems to be an increasing number of entities
incarnate here now who have what is called a homosexual orientation.
Could you explain and expand upon that concept?
Ra: I am Ra. Entities of this condition experience a great deal of distortion
due to the fact that they have experienced many incarnations as biological
male and as biological female. This would not suggest what you call
homosexuality in an active phase were it not for the difficult vibratory
condition of your planetary sphere. There is what you may call great aura
infringement among your crowded urban areas in your more populous
countries, as you call portions of your planetary surface. Under these
conditions the confusions will occur.
Questioner: Why does density of population create these confusions?
                                       32
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

Ra: I am Ra. The bisexual reproductive urge has as its goal, not only the
simple reproductive function, but more especially the desire to serve others
being awakened by this activity.
In an over-crowded situation where each mind/body/spirit complex is under
constant bombardment from other-selves it is understandable that those
who are especially sensitive would not feel the desire to be of service to
otherselves. This would also increase the probability of a lack of desire or a
blockage of the red ray reproductive energy.
In an uncrowded atmosphere this same entity would, through the stimulus
of feeling the solitude about it, then have much more desire to seek out
someone to whom it may be of service thus regularizing the sexual
reproductive function.
Questioner: Roughly how many previous incarnations would a male entity
in this incarnation have had to have had in the past as a female to have a
highly homosexual orientation in this incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. If an entity has had roughly 65% of its incarnations in the
sexual/biological body complex, the opposite polarity to its present body
complex, this entity is vulnerable to infringement of your urban areas and
may perhaps become of what you call an homosexual nature.
It is to be noted at this juncture that although it is much more difficult, it is
possible in this type of association for an entity to be of great service to
another in fidelity and sincere green ray love of a nonsexual nature thus
adjusting or lessening the distortions of its sexual impairment.
Questioner: Is there an imprint occurring on the DNA coding of an entity
so that sexual biases are imprinted due to early sexual experiences?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. Due to the nature of solitary sexual
experiences, it is in most cases unlikely that what you call masturbation has
an imprinting effect upon later experiences.
This is similarly true with some of the encounters which might be seen as
homosexual among those of this age group. These are often, instead,
innocent exercises in curiosity.
However, it is quite accurate that the first experience in which the
mind/body/spirit complex is intensely involved will indeed imprint upon
the entity for that life experience a set of preferences.
Questioner: Does the Orion group use this as a gateway to impress upon
entities preferences which could be of a negative polarization?


                                       33
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

Ra: I am Ra. Just as we of the Confederation attempt to beam our love and
light whenever given the opportunity, including sexual opportunities, so the
Orion group will use an opportunity if it is negatively oriented or if the
individual is negatively oriented.
Questioner: Is there any emotional bias that has nothing to do with
male/female sexual polarity that can create sexual energy buildup in an
entity?
Ra: I am Ra. The sexual energy buildup is extremely unlikely to occur
without sexual bias upon the part of the entity. Perhaps we did not
understand your question, but it seems obvious that it would take an entity
with the potential for sexual activity to experience a sexual energy buildup.
Questioner: I was thinking more of the possibility of the Orion group
influencing certain members of the Third Reich who I have read reports of
having sexual gratification from the observation of the gassing and killing of
entities in the gas chambers.
Ra: I am Ra. We shall repeat these entities had the potential for sexual
energy buildup. The choice of stimulus is certainly the choice of the entity.
In the case of which you speak, these entities were strongly polarized orange
ray, thus finding the energy blockage of power over others, the putting to
death being the ultimate power over others; this then being expressed in a
sexual manner, though solitary.
In this case the desire would continue unabated and be virtually
unquenchable.
You will find, if you observe the entire spectrum of sexual practices among
your peoples, that there are those who experience such gratification from
domination over others either from rape or from other means of
domination. In each case this is an example of energy blockage which is
sexual in its nature.
Questioner: Would the Orion group be able, then, to impress on entities
this orange ray effect? Is this the way that this came about? If we go back to
the beginning of third-density there must be a primal cause of this.
Ra: I am Ra. The cause of this is not Orion. It is the free choice of your
peoples. This is somewhat difficult to explain. We shall attempt.
The sexual energy transfers and blockages are more a manifestation or
example of that which is more fundamental than the other way about.
Therefore, as your peoples became open to the concepts of bellicosity and
the greed of ownership, these various distortions then began to filter down
through the tree of mind into body complex expressions, the sexual
                                      34
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 31

expression being basic to that complex. Thus these sexual energy blockages,
though Orion influenced and intensified, are basically the product of the
being-ness chosen freely by your peoples.
This will be the final question unless we may speak further upon this
question to clarify, or answer any short queries before we close.
Questioner: I just need to know then if this works through the racial
memory and infects the entire population in some way?
Ra: I am Ra. The racial memory contains all that has been experienced.
Thus there is some, shall we say, contamination even of the sexual, this
showing mostly in your own culture as the various predispositions to
adversary relationships, or, as you call them, marriages, rather than the free
giving one to another in the love and the light of the infinite Creator.
Questioner: That was precisely the point that I was trying to make. Thank
you very much. I do not wish to overtire the instrument, so I will just ask if
there is anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable
or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Please be aware that this instrument is somewhat fatigued. The
channel is very clear. However, we find the vital energy low. We do not
wish to deplete the instrument. However, there is, shall we say, an energy
exchange that we feel an honor/duty to offer when this instrument opens
itself. Therefore, counsel we this instrument to attempt to assess the vital
energies carefully before offering itself as open channel.
All is well. You are conscientious.
I am Ra. I leave this instrument and you in the love and in the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      35
             The Law of One, Book II, Session 32
                            February 27, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: We will now continue with the material from the day before
yesterday. The subject is how sexual polarity acts as a catalyst in evolution
and how to best make use of this catalyst. Going back to that material, I will
fill in a few gaps that we possibly do not understand too well at this point.
Can you tell me the difference between orange and yellow ray activation? I
am going to work up from the red ray right on through the violet. We have
covered red ray, so I would like to ask now what the difference is between
yellow and orange ray activation?
Ra: I am Ra. The orange ray is that influence or vibratory pattern wherein
the mind/body/spirit expresses its power on an individual basis. Thus power
over individuals may be seen to be orange ray. This ray has been quite
intense among your peoples on an individual basis. You may see in this ray
the treating of other-selves as non-entities, slaves, or chattel, thus giving
otherselves no status whatever.
The yellow ray is a focal and very powerful ray and concerns the entity in
relation to, shall we say, groups, societies, or large numbers of
mind/body/spirit complexes. This orange—we correct ourselves—this
yellow ray vibration is at the heart of bellicose actions in which one group of
entities feels the necessity and right of dominating other groups of entities
and bending their wills to the wills of the masters. The negative path, as
would call it, uses a combination of the yellow ray and the orange ray in its
polarization patterns. These rays, used in a dedicated fashion, will bring
about a contact with intelligent infinity. The usual nature of sexual
interaction, if one is yellow or orange in primary vibratory patterns, is one
of blockage and then insatiable hunger due to the blockage. When there are
two selves vibrating in this area the potential for polarization through the
sexual interaction is begun, one entity experiencing the pleasure of
humiliation and slavery or bondage, the other experiencing the pleasure of
mastery and control over another entity. This way a sexual energy transfer
of a negative polarity is experienced.
Questioner: From the material that you transmitted February 17th you
stated: “In third ray there are two possibilities. Firstly, if both vibrate in
third ray there will be a mutually strengthening energy transfer.” What
color is third ray in this material?
                                        36
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 32

Ra: I am Ra. The ray we were speaking of in that material should be
properly the green ray or fourth ray.
Questioner: So I should change that third to fourth or green?
Ra: This is correct. Please continue to scan for errors having to do with
numbering, as you call them, as this concept is foreign to us and we must
translate, if you will, when using numbers. This is an on-going weakness of
this contact due to the difference between our ways and yours. Your aid is
appreciated.
Questioner: Thank you. I believe for the time being we have amply covered
green ray, so I am going to skip over green ray and go to blue ray. Could
you tell me the difference that occurs between green ray and blue ray with
the emphasis on blue ray?
Ra: I am Ra. With the green ray transfer of energy you now come to the
great turning point sexually as well as in each other mode of experience.
The green ray may then be turned outward, the entity then giving rather
than receiving. The first giving beyond green ray is the giving of acceptance
or freedom, thus allowing the recipient of blue ray energy transfer the
opportunity for a feeling of being accepted, thus freeing that other-self to
express itself to the giver of this ray. It will be noted that once green ray
energy transfer has been achieved by two mind/body/spirits in mating, the
further rays are available without both entities having the necessity to
progress equally. Thus a blue ray vibrating entity or indigo ray vibrating
entity whose other ray vibrations are clear may share that energy with the
green ray other-self, thus acting as catalyst for the continued learn/teaching
of the other-self. Until an other-self reaches green ray, such energy transfer
through the rays is not possible.
Questioner: What is the difference between indigo and blue ray transfer?
Ra: I am Ra. The indigo ray is the ray of, shall we say, awareness of the
Creator as self; thus one whose indigo ray vibrations have been activated can
offer the energy transfer of Creator to Creator. This is the beginning of the
sacramental nature of what you call your bisexual reproductive act. It is
unique in bearing the allness, the wholeness, the unity in its offering to
other-self.
Questioner: What is the difference between violet ray and the others?
Ra: I am Ra. The violet ray, just as the red ray, is constant in the sexual
experience. Its experience by other-self may be distorted or completely
ignored or not apprehended by other-self. However, the violet ray, being


                                      37
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 32

the sum and substance of the mind/body/spirit complex, surrounds and
informs any action by a mind/body/spirit complex.
Questioner: Do the energy transfers of this nature occur in the fifth, sixth,
and seventh-density—all the rays?
Ra: I am Ra. The rays, as you understand them, have such a different
meaning in the next density and the next and so forth that we must answer
your query in the negative. Energy transfers only take place in fourth, fifth,
and sixth densities. These are still of what you would call a polarized nature.
However, due to the ability of these densities to see the harmonies between
individuals, these entities choose those mates which are harmonious, thus
allowing constant transfer of energy and the propagation of the body
complexes which each density uses. The process is different in the fifth and
the sixth-density than you may understand it. However, it is in these cases
still based upon polarity. In the seventh-density there is not this particular
energy exchange as it is unnecessary to recycle body complexes.
Questioner: I am assuming we have on Earth today and have had in the
past fourth, fifth, and sixth-density Wanderers. As they come into
incarnation in the physical of this density for a period as a Wanderer, what
types of polarizations with respect to these various rays do they find
affecting them?
Ra: I am Ra. I believe I grasp the thrust of your query. Please ask further if
this answer is not sufficient.
Fourth density Wanderers, of which there are not many, will tend to choose
those entities which seem to be full of love or in need of love. There is the
great possibility/probability of entities making errors in judgment due to the
compassion with which other-selves are viewed.
The fifth-density Wanderer is one who is not tremendously affected by the
stimulus of the various rays of other-self and in its own way offers itself
when a need is seen. Such entities are not likely to engage in the, shall we
say, custom of your peoples called marriage and are very likely to feel an
aversion to childbearing and child-raising due to the awareness of the
impropriety of the planetary vibrations relative to the harmonious
vibrations of the density of light.
The sixth-density, whose means of propagation you may liken to what you
call fusion, is likely to refrain, to a great extent, from the bisexual
reproductive programming of the bodily complex and instead seek out those
with whom the sexual energy transfer is of the complete fusion nature in so
far as this is possible in manifestation in third-density.

                                      38
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 32

Questioner: Can you expand a little bit on what you mean by “complete
fusion nature”?
Ra: I am Ra. The entire creation is of the one Creator. Thus the division of
sexual activity into simply that of the bodily complex is an artificial division,
all things thusly being seen as sexual equally, the mind, the body, and the
spirit; all of which are part of the polarity of the entity. Thus sexual fusion
may be seen with or without what you may call sexual intercourse to be the
complete melding of the mind, the body, and the spirit in what feels to be a
constant orgasm, shall we say, of joy and delight each in the other’s being-
ness.
Questioner: Would many Wanderers of these densities have considerable
problems with respect to incarnation in the third-density because of this
different orientation?
Ra: I am Ra. The possibility/probability of such problems, as you call them,
due to sixth-density incarnating in third is rather large. It is not necessarily a
problem if you would call it thusly. It depends upon the unique orientation
of each mind/body/spirit complex having this situation or placement of
vibratory relativities.
Questioner: Can you give me an idea how the different colors … This is a
difficult question to ask. I’m having trouble finding any words. What I’m
trying to get at is how the different colors originate as the functions for the
different expressions in consciousness? I don’t know if this question is
sufficient.
Ra: I am Ra. This question is sufficiently clear for us to attempt explanation
of what, as you have observed, is not easily grasped material for the
intellectual mind. The nature of vibration is such that it may be seen as
having mathematically straight or narrow steps. These steps may be seen as
having boundaries. Within each boundary there are infinite gradations of
vibration or color. However, as one approaches a boundary, an effort must
be made to cross that boundary. These colors are a simplistic way of
expressing the boundary divisions of your density. There is also the
time/space analogy which may be seen as the color itself in a modified
aspect.
Questioner: Thank you. Is it possible for an entity in third-density physical
to vary across the entire band of colors or is the entity pretty well zeroed in
on one color?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this working. Please
restate for clarity.

                                       39
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 32

Questioner: I meant was it possible for a green ray person who is primarily
of green ray activation to vary on both sides of the green ray in a large or a
small amount in regards to energy activation, or is he primarily green ray?
Ra: I am Ra. We grasp the newness of material requested by you. It was
unclear, for we thought we had covered this material. The portion covered
is this: the green ray activation is always vulnerable to the yellow or orange
ray of possession, this being largely yellow ray but often coming into orange
ray. Fear of possession, desire for possession, fear of being possessed, desire
to be possessed: these are the distortions which will cause the deactivation of
green ray energy transfer.
The new material is this: once the green ray has been achieved, the ability of
the entity to enter blue ray is immediate and is only awaiting the efforts of
the individual. The indigo ray is opened only through considerable
discipline and practice largely having to do with acceptance of self, not only
as the polarized and balanced self but as the Creator, as an entity of infinite
worth. This will begin to activate the indigo ray.
Questioner: Thank you.
Ra: I am Ra. Do you have any brief queries before we close?
Questioner: I think that anything I have would be too long, so I will just
ask if there is anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to make the contact better?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. We caution not only this instrument but each to
look well to the vital energies necessary for nondepletion of the instrument
and the contact level. You are most conscientious, my friends. We shall be
with you. I leave you now in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      40
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 33
                             March 1, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: In our last session you said that each of us in these sessions
should look well to the vital energies necessary for nondepletion of the
instrument and the contact level. Did that mean that we should look at the
instrument’s vital energies or be careful of our own vital energies?
Ra: I am Ra. Each entity is responsible for itself. The mechanics of this
process taking place involve firstly, the use of the physical bodily complex of
third-density with its accompanying physical material in order to voice
these words. Thus this instrument needs to watch its vital energies carefully,
for we do not wish to deplete this instrument. Secondly, the function of the
supporting group may be seen to be firstly, that of protection for this
contact; secondly, that of energizing the instrument and intensifying its vital
energies.
This supporting group has always, due to an underlying harmony, been of a
very stable nature as regards protection in love and light, thus ensuring the
continuation of this narrow band contact. However, the vital energies of
either of the supporting members being depleted, the instrument must then
use a larger portion of its vital energies, thus depleting itself more than
would be profitable on a long-term basis.
Please understand that we ask your apology for this infringement upon your
free will. However, it is our distortion/understanding that you would prefer
this information rather than, being left totally to your own
dedication/distortion, deplete the instrument or deplete the group to the
point where the contact cannot be sustained.
Questioner: Can you give us advice on how to maintain the best possible
condition for maintaining contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We have given information concerning the proper nurturing
of this channel. We, therefore, repeat ourselves only in two ways in general.
Firstly, we suggest that rather than being, shall we say, brave and ignoring a
physical complex weakness/distortion it is good to share this distortion with
the group and thus perhaps, shall we say, remove one opportunity for
contact which is very wearying for the instrument, in order that another
opportunity might come about in which the instrument is properly
supported.

                                      41
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

Secondly, the work begun in harmony may continue in harmony,
thanksgiving and praise of opportunities and of the Creator. These are your
protections. These are our suggestions. We cannot be specific for your free
will is of the essence in this contact. As we said, we only speak to this
subject because of our grasp of your orientation towards long-term
maintenance of this contact. This is acceptable to us.
Questioner: Thank you very much. We have a device for so-called color
therapy, and since we were on the concept of the different colors in the last
session I was wondering if this would in some way apply to the principle of
color therapy in the shining of particular colors on the physical body. Does
this create a beneficial effect and can you tell me something about it?
Ra: I am Ra. This therapy, as you call it, is a somewhat clumsy and variably
useful tool for instigating in an entity’s mind/body/spirit complex an
intensification of energies or vibrations which may be of aid to the entity.
The variableness of this device is due firstly to the lack of true colors used,
secondly, to the extreme variation in sensitivity to vibration among your
peoples.
Questioner: I would think that you could achieve a true color by passing
light through a crystal of the particular color. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This would be one way of approaching accuracy in color. It is
a matter of what you would call quality control that the celluloid used is of
a varying color. This is not of a great or even visible variation, however, it
does make some difference given specific applications.
Questioner: Possibly you could use a prism breaking white light into its
spectrum and screening off all parts of the spectrum except that which you
wish to use by passing it through a slit. Would this be true?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I was wondering if there is a programming of experiences that
causes an individual to get certain catalysts in his daily life. For instance, as
we go through our daily life there are many things which we can experience.
We can look at these experiences as occurring by pure chance or by a
conscious design of our own such as making appointments or going places.
I was wondering if there was a behind-the-scenes, as you might call it,
programming of catalyst to create the necessary experiences for more rapid
growth in the case of some entities. Does this happen?
Ra: I am Ra. We believe we grasp the heart of your query. Please request
further information if we are not correct.


                                       42
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

The incarnating entity which has become conscious of the incarnative
process and thus programs its own experience may choose the amount of
catalyst or, to phrase this differently, the number of lessons which it will
undertake to experience and to learn from in one incarnation. This does not
mean that all is predestined, but rather that there are invisible guidelines
shaping events which will function according to this programming. Thus if
one opportunity is missed another will appear until the, shall we say,
student of the life experience grasps that a lesson is being offered and
undertakes to learn it.
Questioner: Then these lessons would be reprogrammed, you might say, as
the life experience continues. Let’s say that an entity develops the bias that
he actually didn’t choose to develop prior to incarnation. It is then possible
to program experiences so that he will have an opportunity to alleviate this
bias through balancing. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.
Questioner: Thank you. From this I would extrapolate to the conjecture
that the orientation in mind of the entity is the only thing that is of any
consequence at all. The physical catalyst that he experiences, regardless of
what is happening about him, will be a function strictly of his orientation in
mind. I will use as an example (example deleted) this being a statement of the
orientation in mind governing the catalyst. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We prefer not to use any well-known examples, sayings, or
adages in our communications to you due to the tremendous amount of
distortion which any well-known saying has undergone. Therefore, we may
answer the first part of your query asking that you delete the example. It is
completely true to the best of our knowledge that the orientation or
polarization of the mind/body/spirit complex is the cause of the perceptions
generated by each entity. Thus a scene may be observed in your grocery
store. The entity ahead of self may be without sufficient funds. One entity
may then take this opportunity to steal. Another may take this opportunity
to feel itself a failure. Another may unconcernedly remove the least
necessary items, pay for what it can, and go about its business. The one
behind the self, observing, may feel compassion, may feel an insult because
of standing next to a poverty-stricken person, may feel generosity, may feel
indifference.
Do you now see the analogies in a more appropriate manner?
Questioner: I think that I do. Then from this I will extrapolate the concept
which is somewhat more difficult because as you have explained before,
even fourth-density positive has the concept of defensive action, but above

                                      43
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

the level of fourth-density the concept of defensive action is not in use. The
concept of defensive action and offensive action are very much in use in our
present density.
I am assuming that if an entity is polarized strongly enough in his thought
in a positive sense that defensive action is not going to be necessary for him
because the opportunity to apply defensive action will never originate for
him. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is unknowable. In each case, as we have said, an entity
able to program experiences may choose the number and the intensity of
lessons to be learned. It is possible that an extremely positively oriented
entity might program for itself situations testing the ability of self to refrain
from defensive action even to the point of the physical death of self or
other-self. This is an intensive lesson and it is not known, shall we say, what
entities have programmed. We may, if we desire, read this programming.
However, this is an infringement and we choose not to do so.
Questioner: I will ask you if you are familiar with a motion picture called
The Ninth Configuration. Are you familiar with this?
Ra: I am Ra. We scan your mind and see this configuration called The
Ninth Configuration.
Questioner: This motion picture brought out the point about which we
have been talking. The Colonel had to make a decision. I was wondering
about his polarization. He could have knuckled under, you might say, to
the negative forces, but he chose to defend his friend instead. Is it possible
for you to estimate which is more positively polarizing: to defend the
positively oriented entity, or to allow suppression by the negatively oriented
entities?
Ra: I am Ra. This question takes in the scope of fourth-density as well as
your own and its answer may best be seen by the action of the entity called
Jehoshuah, which you call Jesus. This entity was to be defended by its
friends. The entity reminded its friends to put away the sword. This entity
then delivered itself to be put to the physical death. The impulse to protect
the loved other-self is one which persists through the fourth-density, a
density abounding in compassion. More than this we cannot and need not
say.
Questioner: Thank you. As we near the end of this master cycle there may
be an increasing amount of catalyst for entities. I am wondering if, as the
planetary vibrations mismatch somewhat with the fourth-density vibrations
and catalyst is increased, if this will create more polarization thereby getting
a slightly greater harvest?
                                       44
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

Ra: I am Ra. The question must be answered in two parts. Firstly, the
planetary catastrophes, as you may call them, are a symptom of the difficult
harvest rather than a consciously programmed catalyst for harvest. Thus we
do not concern ourselves with it, for it is random in respect to conscious
catalyst such as we may make available.
The second portion is this: the results of the random catalyst of what you
call the earth changes are also random. Thus we may see
probability/possibility vortices going towards positive and negative.
However, it will be as it will be. The true opportunities for conscious
catalyst are not a function of the earth changes but of the result of the
seniority system of incarnations which at the time of the harvest has placed
in incarnation those whose chances of using life experiences to become
harvestable are the best.
Questioner: Is this seniority system also used in the service to self side for
becoming harvestable on that side?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You may ask one more full question at this
time.
Questioner: What I would like for you to do is list all the major
mechanisms designed to provide catalytic experience that do not include
interaction with other-self. That is the first part.
Ra: I am Ra. We grasp from this question that you realize that the primary
mechanism for catalytic experience in third-density is other-self. The list of
other catalytic influences: firstly, the Creator’s universe; secondly, the self.
Questioner: Can you list any sub-headings under self or ways the self is
acted upon catalytically which would produce experience?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, the self unmanifested. Secondly, the self in relation to
the societal self created by self and other-self. Thirdly, the interaction
between self and the gadgets, toys, and amusements of the self, other-self
invention. Fourthly, the self relationship with those attributes which you
may call war and rumors of war.
Questioner: I was thinking possibly of the catalyst of physical pain. Does
this go under this heading?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, it going under the heading of the unmanifested
self; that is, the self which does not need other-self in order to manifest or
act.




                                       45
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

Questioner: Do we have enough time left to ask the second part of this
question which is to list all major mechanisms designed to provide the
catalyst that include action with other-self?
Ra: I am Ra. You have much time for this, for we may express this list in
one of two ways. We could speak infinitely, or we could simply state that
any interaction betwixt self and other-self has whatever potential for catalyst
that there exists in the potential difference between self and other-self, this
moderated and undergirded by the constant fact of the Creator as self and
as other-self. You may ask to this question further if you wish specific
information.
Questioner: I believe that this is sufficient for the time being.
Ra: I am Ra. Do you have a brief query or two before we close this working?
Questioner: Yes, here is one question. Is there any difference in violet ray
activity or brightness between entities who are at entrance level both
positive and negative to fourth-density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The violet ray of the positive fourth-density
will be tinged with the green, blue, indigo triad of energies. This tinge may
be seen as a portion of a rainbow or prism, as you know it, the rays being
quite distinct.
The violet ray of fourth-density negative has in its aura, shall we say, the
tinge of red, orange, yellow, these rays being muddied rather than distinct.
Questioner: What would the rays of fifth and sixth-density look like?
Ra: I am Ra. We may speak only approximately. However, we hope you
understand, shall we say, that there is a distinctive difference in the color
structure of each density.
Fifth density is perhaps best described as extremely white in vibration.
The sixth-density of a whiteness which contains a golden quality as you
would perceive it; these colors having to do with the blending into wisdom
of the compassion learned in fourth-density, then in sixth the blending of
wisdom back into an unified understanding of compassion viewed with
wisdom. This golden color is not of your spectrum but is what you would
call alive.
You may ask one more question briefly.
Questioner: Then I will ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?


                                       46
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 33

Ra: I am Ra. This working is well. You are attempting to be conscientious.
We thank you. May we say we enjoyed your vision of our social memory
complex drinking one of your liquids while speaking through this
instrument.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                      47
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 34
                             March 4, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: You stated at an earlier time that penetration of the eighth level
or intelligent infinity allows a mind/body/spirit complex to be harvested if it
wishes at any time/space during the cycle. When this penetration of the
eighth level occurs what does the entity who penetrates it experience?
Ra: I am Ra. The experience of each entity is unique in its perception of
intelligent infinity. Perceptions range from a limitless joy to a strong
dedication to service to others while in the incarnated state. The entity
which reaches intelligent infinity most often will perceive this experience as
one of unspeakable profundity. However, it is not usual for the entity to
immediately desire the cessation of the incarnation. Rather the desire to
communicate or use this experience to aid others is extremely strong.
Questioner: Thank you. Would you define karma?
Ra: I am Ra. Our understanding of karma is that which may be called
inertia. Those actions which are put into motion will continue using the
ways of balancing until such time as the controlling or higher principle
which you may liken unto your braking or stopping is invoked. This
stoppage of the inertia of action may be called forgiveness. These two
concepts are inseparable.
Questioner: If an entity develops what is called karma in an incarnation, is
there then programming that sometimes occurs so that he will experience
catalysts that will enable him to get to a point of forgiveness thereby
alleviating the karma?
Ra: I am Ra. This is, in general, correct. However, both self and any
involved other-self may, at any time through the process of understanding,
acceptance, and forgiveness, ameliorate these patterns. This is true at any
point in an incarnative pattern. Thus one who has set in motion an action
may forgive itself and never again make that error. This also brakes or stops
what you call karma.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you give me examples of catalytic action from
the last session beginning with the self unmanifested producing learning
catalyst?



                                      48
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 34

Ra: I am Ra. We observed your interest in the catalyst of pain. This
experience is most common among your entities. The pain may be of the
physical complex. More often it is of the mental and emotional complex. In
some few cases the pain is spiritual in complex-nature. This creates a
potential for learning. The lessons to be learned vary. Almost always these
lessons include patience, tolerance, and the ability for the light touch.
Very often the catalyst for emotional pain, whether it be the death of the
physical complex of one other-self which is loved or other seeming loss, will
simply result in the opposite, in a bitterness and impatience, a souring. This
is catalyst which has gone awry. In these cases then there will be additional
catalyst provided to offer the unmanifested self further opportunities for
discovering the self as all-sufficient Creator containing all that there is and
full of joy.
Questioner: Do what we call contagious diseases play any part in this
process with respect to the unmanifested self?
Ra: I am Ra. These so-called contagious diseases are those entities of
second-density which offer an opportunity for this type of catalyst. If this
catalyst is unneeded, then these second-density creatures, as you would call
them, do not have an effect. In each of these generalizations you may please
note that there are anomalies so that we cannot speak to every circumstance
but only to the general run or way of things as you experience them.
Questioner: What part do what we call birth defects play in this process?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a portion of the programming of the mind/body/spirit
complex totality manifested in the mind/body/spirit of third-density. These
defects are planned as limitations which are part of the experience intended
by the entity’s totality complex. This includes genetic predispositions, as
you may call them.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you give me the same type of information
about the self in relation to the societal self?
Ra: I am Ra. The unmanifested self may find its lessons those which
develop any of the energy influx centers of the mind/body/spirit complex.
The societal and self interactions most often concentrate upon the second
and third energy centers. Thus those most active in attempting to remake or
alter the society are those working from feelings of being correct personally
or of having answers which will put power in a more correct configuration.
This may be seen to be of a full travel from negative to positive in
orientation. Either will activate these energy ray centers.



                                      49
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 34

There are some few whose desires to aid society are of a green ray nature or
above. These entities, however, are few due to the understanding, may we
say, of fourth ray that universal love freely given is more to be desired than
principalities or even the rearrangement of peoples or political structures.
Questioner: If an entity were to be strongly biased toward positive societal
effects, what would this do to his yellow ray in the aura as opposed to an
entity who wanted to create an empire of society and govern it with an iron
fist?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us take two such positively oriented active souls no longer
in your physical time/space. The one known as Albert went into a strange
and, to it, a barbaric society in order that it might heal. This entity was able
to mobilize great amounts of energy and what you call money. This entity
spent much green ray energy both as a healer and as a lover of your
instrument known as the organ. This entity’s yellow ray was bright and
crystallized by the efforts needed to procure the funds to promulgate its
efforts. However, the green and blue rays were of a toweringly brilliant
nature as well. The higher levels, as you may call them, being activated, the
lower, as you may call them, energy points remaining in a balance, being
quite, quite bright.
The other example is the entity, Martin. This entity dealt in a great degree
with rather negative orange ray and yellow ray vibratory patterns. However,
this entity was able to keep open the green ray energy and due to the
severity of its testing, if anything, this entity may be seen to have polarized
more towards the positive due to its fidelity to service to others in the face
of great catalyst.
Questioner: Could you give me the last names of Albert and Martin?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities are known to you as Albert Schweitzer and
Martin Luther King.
Questioner: I thought that that was correct, but I wasn’t sure. Can you give
me the same type of information that we have been getting here with
respect to the unmanifested interacting between self and gadgets and toys
and inventions?
Ra: I am Ra. In this particular instance we again concentrate for the most
part in the orange and in the yellow energy centers. In a negative sense
many of the gadgets among your peoples, that is what you call your
communication devices and other distractions such as the less competitive
games, may be seen to have the distortion of keeping the mind/body/spirit
complex unactivated so that yellow and orange ray activity is much

                                       50
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 34

weakened thus carefully decreasing the possibility of eventual green ray
activation.
Others of your gadgets may be seen to be tools whereby the entity explores
the capabilities of its physical or mental complexes and in some few cases,
the spiritual complex, thus activating the orange ray in what you call your
team sports and in other gadgets such as your modes of transport. These
may be seen to be ways of investigating the feelings of power; more
especially, power over others or a group power over another group of other-
selves.
Questioner: What is the general overall effect of television on our society
with respect to this catalyst?
Ra: I am Ra. Without ignoring the green ray attempts of many to
communicate via this medium such information of truth and beauty as may
be helpful, we must suggest that the sum effect of this gadget is that of
distraction and sleep.
Questioner: Can you give me the same type of information that we are
working on now with respect to war and rumors of war?
Ra: I am Ra. You may see this in relationship to your gadgets. This war and
self relationship is a fundamental perception of the maturing entity. There
is a great chance to accelerate in whatever direction is desired. One may
polarize negatively by assuming bellicose attitudes for whatever reason. One
may find oneself in the situation of war and polarize somewhat towards the
positive activating orange, yellow, and then green rays by heroic, if you may
call them this, actions taken to preserve the mind/body/spirit complexes of
other-selves.
Finally, one may polarize very strongly third ray by expressing the principle
of universal love at the total expense of any distortion towards involvement
in bellicose actions. In this way the entity may become a conscious being in
a very brief span of your time/space. This may be seen to be what you
would call a traumatic progression. It is to be noted that among your
entities a large percentage of all progression has as catalyst, trauma.
Questioner: You just used the term third ray in that statement. Was that
the term you meant to use?
Ra: I am Ra. We intended the green ray. Our difficulty lies in our
perception of red ray and violet ray as fixed; thus the inner rays are those
which are varying and are to be observed as those indications of seniority in
the attempts to form an harvest.


                                      51
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 34

Questioner: Would the red ray, an intense red ray, then be used as an index
for seniority in incarnation as well as an intense violet ray?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. In the graduation or harvesting to
fourth-density positive, the red ray is seen only as that, which being
activated, is the basis for all that occurs in vibratory levels, the sum of this
being violet ray energy.
This violet ray is the only consideration for fourth-density positive. In
assessing the harvestable fourth-density negative, the intensity of the red as
well as the orange and the yellow rays is looked upon quite carefully as a
great deal of stamina and energy of this type is necessary for the negative
progression, it being extremely difficult to open the gateway to intelligent
infinity from the solar plexus center. This is necessary for harvest in fourth-
density negative.
Questioner: Is it possible for you to use as an example our General Patton
and tell me the effect that war had on him in his development?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this working. The one of
whom you speak, known as George, was one in whom the programming of
previous incarnations had created a pattern or inertia which was irresistible
in its incarnation in your time/space. This entity was of a strong yellow ray
activation with frequent green ray openings and occasional blue ray
openings. However, it did not find itself able to break the mold of previous
traumatic experiences of a bellicose nature.
This entity polarized somewhat towards the positive in its incarnation due
to its singleness of belief in truth and beauty. This entity was quite sensitive.
It felt a great honor/duty to the preservation of that which was felt by the
entity to be true, beautiful, and in need of defense. This entity perceived
itself a gallant figure. It polarized somewhat towards the negative in its lack
of understanding the green ray it carried with it, rejecting the forgiveness
principle which is implicit in universal love.
The sum total of this incarnation vibrationally was a slight increase in
positive polarity but a decrease in harvestability due to the rejection of the
Law or Way of Responsibility; that is, seeing universal love, yet still it
fought on.
Questioner: Do we have enough time for me to ask if the death, almost
immediately after the cessation of war, of this entity could have been so that
it could have immediately been reincarnated so that it could make harvest?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.


                                        52
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 34

Questioner: Thank you. Then I will just ask if there is anything that we can
do to make the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. We leave you, my friends, in the love and the light
of the One which is All in All. I leave you in an ever-lasting peace. Go forth,
therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                      53
             The Law of One, Book II, Session 35
                              March 6, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I would like to say that we consider it a great privilege to be
doing this work, and we hope that we will be questioning in the direction
that will be of value to the readers of this material. I thought that in this
session it might be helpful to inspect the effect of the rays of different well-
known figures in history to aid in understanding how the catalyst of the
illusion creates spiritual growth. I was making a list that I thought we might
use to hit the high points on the workings of the catalysts on these
individuals starting with the one we know as Franklin D. Roosevelt. Could
you say something about that entity?
Ra: I am Ra. It is to be noted that in discussing those who are well-known
among your peoples there is the possibility that information may be seen to
be specific to one entity whereas in actuality the great design of experience is
much the same for each entity. It is with this in mind that we would discuss
the experiential forces which offered catalyst to an individual.
It is further to be noted that in the case of those entities lately incarnate
much distortion may have taken place in regard to misinformation and
misinterpretation of an entity’s thoughts or behaviors.
We shall now proceed to, shall we say, speak of the basic parameters of the
one known as Franklin. When any entity comes into third-density
incarnation, each of its energy centers is potentiated but must be activated
by the self using experience.
The one known as Franklin developed very quickly up through red, orange,
yellow, and green and began to work in the blue ray energy center at a
tender age, as you would say. This rapid growth was due, firstly, to previous
achievements in the activation of the rays, secondly, to the relative comfort
and leisure of its early existence, thirdly, due to the strong desire upon the
part of the entity to progress. This entity mated with an entity whose blue
ray vibrations were of a strength more than equal to its own thus acquiring
catalyst for further growth in that area that was to persist throughout the
incarnation.
This entity had some difficulty with continued green ray activity due to the
excessive energy which was put into the activities regarding other-selves in
the distortion towards acquiring power. This was to have its toll upon the

                                       54
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 35

physical vehicle, as you may call it. The limitation of the nonmovement of a
portion of the physical vehicle opened once again, for this entity, the
opportunity for concentration upon the more, shall we say, universal or
idealistic aspects of power; that is, the nonabusive use of power. Thus at the
outset of a bellicose action this entity had lost some positive polarity due to
excessive use of the orange and yellow ray energies at the expense of green
and blue ray energies, then had regained the polarity due to the catalytic
effects of a painful limitation upon the physical complex.
This entity was not of a bellicose nature but rather during the conflict
continued to vibrate in green ray working with the blue ray energies. The
entity who was the one known as Franklin’s teacher also functioned greatly
during this period as blue ray activator, not only for its mate but also in a
more universal expression. This entity polarized continuously in a positive
fashion in the universal sense while, in a less universal sense, developing a
pattern of what may be called karma; this karma having to do with
inharmonious relationship distortions with the mate/teacher.
Questioner: Two things I would like to clear up. First, then Franklin’s
teacher was his wife? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Secondly, did Franklin place the physical limitation on his
body himself?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The basic guidelines for the lessons
and purposes of incarnation had been carefully set forth before incarnation
by the mind/body/spirit complex totality. If the one known as Franklin had
avoided the excessive enjoyment of or attachment to the competitiveness
which may be seen to be inherent in the processes of its occupation, this
entity would not have had the limitation.
However, the desire to serve and to grow was strong in this programming
and when the opportunities began to cease due to these distortions towards
love of power the entity’s limiting factor was activated.
Questioner: I would now like to ask for the same type of information with
respect to Adolf Hitler. You have given a little of this already. It is not
necessary for you to recover what you have already given. Could you
complete that information?
Ra: I am Ra. In speaking of the one you call Adolf we have some difficulty
due to the intense amount of confusion present in this entity’s life patterns
as well as the great confusion which greets any discussion of this entity.


                                      55
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 35

Here we see an example of one who, in attempting activation of the highest
rays of energy while lacking the green ray key, canceled itself out as far as
polarization either towards positive or negative. This entity was basically
negative. However, its confusion was such that the personality disintegrated,
thus leaving the mind/body/spirit complex unharvestable and much in need
of healing.
This entity followed the pattern of negative polarization which suggests the
elite and the enslaved, this being seen by the entity to be of an helpful
nature for the societal structure. However, in drifting from the conscious
polarization into what you may call a twilight world where dream took the
place of events in your space/time continuum, this entity failed in its
attempt to serve the Creator in an harvestable degree along the path of
service to self. Thus we see the so-called insanity which may often arise
when an entity attempts to polarize more quickly than experience may be
integrated.
We have advised and suggested caution and patience in previous
communications and do so again, using this entity as an example of the
over-hasty opening of polarization without due attention to the synthesized
and integrated mind/body/spirit complex. To know your self is to have the
foundation upon firm ground.
Questioner: Thank you. That is an important example I believe. I was
wondering if any of those who were subordinate to Adolf at that time were
able to polarize in a harvestable nature on the negative path?
Ra: I am Ra. We can speak only of two entities who may be harvestable in a
negative sense, others still being in the physical incarnation: one known to
you as Hermann; the other known, as it preferred to be called, Himmler.
Questioner: Thank you. Earlier we discussed Abraham Lincoln as a rather
unique case. is it possible for you to tell us why the fourth-density being
used Abraham Lincoln’s body, what its orientation was, and when this took
place with respect to the activities that were occurring in our society at that
time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is possible.
Questioner: Would it be of value for the reader to know this in your
estimation?
Ra: I am Ra. You must shape your queries according to your discernment.
Questioner: Well in that case I would like to know the motivation for this
use of Abraham Lincoln’s body at that time?

                                      56
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 35

Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this session as we find the
instrument quite low in vital energies.
The one known as Abraham had an extreme difficulty in many ways and,
due to physical, mental, and spiritual pain, was weary of life but without the
orientation to self-destruction. In your time, 1853, this entity was contacted
in sleep by a fourth-density being. This being was concerned with the
battles between the forces of light and the forces of darkness which have
been waged in fourth-density for many of your years.
This entity accepted the honor/duty of completing the one known as
Abraham’s karmic patterns and the one known as Abraham discovered that
this entity would attempt those things which the one known as Abraham
desired to do but felt it could not. Thus the exchange was made.
The entity, Abraham, was taken to a plane of suspension until the cessation
of its physical vehicle much as though we of Ra would arrange with this
instrument to remain in the vehicle, come out of the trance state, and
function as this instrument, leaving this instrument’s mind and spirit
complex in its suspended state.
The planetary energies at this time were at what seemed to this entity to be
at a critical point, for that which you know as freedom had gained in
acceptance as a possibility among many peoples. This entity saw the work
done by those beginning the democratic concept of freedom, as you call it,
in danger of being abridged or abrogated by the rising belief and use of the
principle of the enslavement of entities. This is a negative concept of a fairly
serious nature in your density. This entity, therefore, went forward into
what it saw as the battle for the light, for healing of a rupture in the concept
of freedom.
This entity did not gain or lose karma by these activities due to its
detachment from any outcome. Its attitude throughout was one of service
to others, more especially to the downtrodden or enslaved. The polarity of
the individual was somewhat, but not severely, lessened by the cumulative
feelings and thought forms which were created due to large numbers of
entities leaving the physical plane due to trauma of battle.
May we ask if this is the information you requested or if we may supply any
further information?
Questioner: I will ask any further questions during the next working period
which should occur in about four days. We do not want to overtire the
instrument. I will only ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?

                                       57
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 35

Ra: I am Ra. All is well. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of
the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore rejoicing in the power and the
peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                       58
             The Law of One, Book II, Session 36
                              March 10, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: In previous communications you have spoken of the
mind/body/spirit complex totality. Would you please give us a definition of
the mind/body/spirit complex totality?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a dimension in which time does not have sway. In
this dimension, the mind/body/spirit in its eternal dance of the present may
be seen in totality, and before the mind/body/spirit complex which then
becomes a part of the social memory complex is willingly absorbed into the
allness of the one Creator, the entity knows itself in its totality.
This mind/body/spirit complex totality functions as, shall we say, a resource
for what you perhaps would call the higher self. The higher self, in turn, is a
resource for examining the distillations of third-density experience and
programming further experience. This is also true of densities four, five, and
six with the mind/body/spirit complex totality coming into consciousness in
the course of seventh density.
Questioner: Then would the mind/body/spirit complex totality be
responsible for programming changes in catalyst during a third-density
experience of the mind/body/spirit complex so that the proper catalyst
would be added, shall we say, as conditions for the complex changed during
third-density experience?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The higher self, as you call it, that is, that self
which exists with full understanding of the accumulation of experiences of
the entity, aids the entity in achieving healing of the experiences which have
not been learned properly and assists as you have indicated in further life
experience programming, as you may call it.
The mind/body/spirit complex totality is that which may be called upon by
the higher self aspect just as the mind/body/spirit complex calls upon the
higher self. In the one case you have a structured situation within the
space/time continuum with the higher self having available to it the totality
of experiences which have been collected by an entity and a very firm grasp
of the lessons to be learned in this density.
The mind/body/spirit complex totality is as the shifting sands and is in
some part a collection of parallel developments of the same entity. This
information is made available to the higher self aspect. This aspect may then
                                        59
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 36

use these projected probability/possibility vortices in order to better aid in
what you would call future life programming.
Questioner: Out of the Seth Material we have a statement in which Seth
says that each entity here on Earth is one part of or aspect of a higher self or
Oversoul which has many aspects or parts in many dimensions all of which
learn lessons which allow the higher self to progress in a balanced manner.
Am I to understand from this that there are many experiences similar to the
one which we experience in the third-density which are governed by a single
higher self?
Ra: I am Ra. The correctness of this statement is variable. The more in
balance an entity becomes, the less the possibility/probability vortices may
need to be explored in parallel experiences.
Questioner: Do I understand from this then that the higher self or
Oversoul may break down into numerous units if the experience is required
to what we would call simultaneously experience different types of catalysts
and then oversee these experiences?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a statement we cannot say to be correct or incorrect
due to the confusions of what you call time. True simultaneity is available
only when all things are seen to be occurring at once. This overshadows the
concept of which you speak. The concept of various parts of the being
living experiences of varying natures simultaneously is not precisely accurate
due to your understanding that this would indicate that this was occurring
with true simultaneity. This is not the case.
The case is from universe to universe and parallel existences can then be
programmed by the higher self, given the information available from the
mind/body/spirit complex totality regarding the probability/possibility
vortices at any crux.
Questioner: Could you give an example of how this programming by the
higher self would then bring about education through parallel experiences?
Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps the simplest example of this apparent simultaneity of
existence of two selves, which are in truth one self at the same time/space, is
this: the Oversoul, as you call it, or higher self, seems to exist simultaneously
with the mind/body/spirit complex which it aids. This is not actually
simultaneous, for the higher self is moving to the mind/body/spirit complex
as needed from a position in development of the entity which would be
considered in the future of this entity.




                                       60
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 36

Questioner: Then the higher self operates from the future as we understand
things. In other words my higher self would operate from what I consider to
be my future? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. From the standpoint of your space/time, this is correct.
Questioner: In that case my higher self would have a very large advantage in
knowing what was needed since it would know, as far as I am concerned,
what was going to happen. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect, in that this would be an abrogation of free
will. The higher self aspect is aware of the lessons learned through the sixth-
density. The progress rate is fairly well understood. The choices which must
be made to achieve the higher self as it is are in the provenance of the
mind/body/spirit complex itself.
Thus the higher self is like the map in which the destination is known; the
roads are very well known, these roads being designed by intelligent infinity
working through intelligent energy. However, the higher self aspect can
program only for the lessons and certain predisposing limitations if it
wishes. The remainder is completely the free choice of each entity. There is
the perfect balance between the known and the unknown.
Questioner: I’m sorry for having so much trouble with these concepts, but
they are very difficult I am sure to translate into our understanding and
language. Some of my questions may be rather ridiculous, but does this
higher self have some type of vehicle like our physical vehicle? Does it have
a bodily complex?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The higher self is of a certain advancement
within sixth-density going into the seventh. After the seventh has been well
entered the mind/body/spirit complex becomes so totally a
mind/body/spirit complex totality that it begins to gather spiritual mass and
approach the octave density. Thus the looking backwards is finished at that
point.
Questioner: Is the higher self of every entity of a sixth-density nature?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. This is an honor/duty of self to self as one
approaches seventh density.
Questioner: Let me be sure that I understand this then. We have spoken of
certain particular individuals. For instance we were speaking of George
Patton in a previous communication. Then his higher self at the time of his
incarnation here as George Patton about forty years ago was of sixth-
density? is this correct?

                                      61
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 36

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We make note at this time that each entity has
several beings upon which to call for inner support. Any of these may be
taken by an entity to be the mind/body/spirit complex totality. However,
this is not the case. The mind/body/spirit complex totality is a nebulous
collection of all that may occur held in understanding; the higher self itself a
projection or manifestation of mind/body/spirit complex totality which
then may communicate with the mind/body/spirit during the discarnate
part of a cycle of rebirth or during the incarnation; may communicate if the
proper pathways or channels through the roots of mind are opened.
Questioner: These channels would then be opened by meditation and I am
assuming that the intense polarization would help in this. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. Intense polarization does not
necessarily develop, in the mind/body/spirit complex, the will or need to
contact the Oversoul. Each path of life experience is unique. However,
given the polarization, the will is greatly enhanced and visa-versa.
Questioner: Let me take as an example the one that you said was called
Himmler. We are assuming from this that his higher self was of the sixth-
density and it was stated that Himmler had selected the negative path.
Would his higher self then dwell in a sixth-density negative type of
situation? Can you expand on this concept?
Ra: I am Ra. There are no negative beings which have attained the Oversoul
manifestation, which is the honor/duty of the mind/body/spirit complex
totality, of late sixth-density as you would term it in your time
measurements. These negatively oriented mind/body/spirit complexes have
a difficulty which to our knowledge has never been overcome, for after fifth-
density graduation wisdom is available but must be matched with an equal
amount of love. This love/light is very, very difficult to achieve in unity
when following the negative path and during the earlier part of the sixth-
density, society complexes of the negative orientation will choose to release
the potential and leap into the sixth-density positive.
Therefore, the Oversoul which makes its understanding available to all who
are ready for such aid is towards the positive. However, the free will of the
individual is paramount, and any guidance given by the higher self may be
seen in either the positive or negative polarity depending upon the choice of
a mind/body/spirit complex.
Questioner: Then using Himmler as an example, was his higher self at the
time he was incarnate in the 1940s a sixth-density positively oriented higher
self?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
                                      62
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 36

Questioner: Was Himmler in any way in contact with his higher self at that
time when he was incarnate during the 1940s?
Ra: I am Ra. We remind you that the negative path is one of separation.
What is the first separation: the self from the self. The one known as
Himmler did not choose to use its abilities of will and polarization to seek
guidance from any source but its conscious drives, self-chosen in the life
experience and nourished by previous biases created in other life
experiences.
Questioner: Well then let’s say that when Himmler reaches sixth-density
negative, would he realize that his higher self was positively oriented and for
that reason make the jump from negative to positive orientation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The sixth-density negative entity is extremely
wise. It observes the spiritual entropy occurring due to the lack of ability to
express the unity of sixth-density. Thus, loving the Creator and realizing at
some point that the Creator is not only self but other-self as self, this entity
consciously chooses an instantaneous energy reorientation so that it may
continue its evolution.
Questioner: Then the sixth-density entity who has reached that point in
positive orientation may choose to become what we call a Wanderer and
move back. I am wondering if this ever occurs with a negatively oriented
sixth-density entity? Do any ever move back as Wanderers?
Ra: I am Ra. Once the negatively polarized entity has reached a certain
point in the wisdom density it becomes extremely unlikely that it will
choose to risk the forgetting, for this polarization is not selfless but selfish
and with wisdom realizes the jeopardy of such “Wandering.” Occasionally a
sixth-density negative becomes a Wanderer in an effort to continue to
polarize towards the negative. This is extremely unusual.
Questioner: Then what is the mechanism that this unusual sixth-density
entity would wish to gain to polarize more negatively through Wandering?
Ra: I am Ra. The Wanderer has the potential of greatly accelerating the
density whence it comes in its progress in evolution. This is due to the
intensive life experiences and opportunities of the third-density. Thusly the
positively oriented Wanderer chooses to hazard the danger of the forgetting
in order to be of service to others by radiating love of others. If the
forgetting is penetrated the amount of catalyst in third-density will polarize
the Wanderer with much greater efficiency than shall be expected in the
higher and more harmonious densities.



                                       63
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 36

Similarly, the negatively oriented Wanderer dares to hazard the forgetting in
order that it might accelerate its progress in evolution in its own density by
serving itself in third-density by offering to other-selves the opportunity to
hear the information having to do with negative polarization.
Questioner: Are there any examples of sixth-density negatively polarized
Wanderers in our historical past?
Ra: I am Ra. This information could be harmful. We withhold it. Please
attempt to view the entities about you as part of the Creator. We can
explain no further.
Questioner: It is very difficult at times for us to get more than a small
percentage of under-standing of some of these concepts because of our
limitation of awareness, but I think that some meditation on the
information from today will help us in formulating some questions about
these concepts.
Ra: I am Ra. May we ask for any brief queries before we leave this
instrument?
Questioner: I’ll just ask one short one before we close. Can you tell me
what percentage of the Wanderers on Earth today have been successful in
penetrating the memory block and have become aware of who they are, and
finally, is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We can approximate the percentage of those penetrating
intelligently their status. This is between eight and one-half and nine and
three-quarters percent. There is a larger percentile group of those who have
a fairly well defined, shall we say, symptomology indicating to them that
they are not of this, shall we say, “insanity.” This amounts to a bit over fifty
percent of the remainder. Nearly one-third of the remainder are aware that
something about them is different, so you see there are many gradations of
awakening to the knowledge of being a Wanderer. We may add that it is to
the middle and first of these groups that this information will, shall we say,
make sense.
This instrument is well. The resting place is somewhat deleterious in its
effect upon the comfort of the dorsal side of this instrument’s physical
vehicle. We have mentioned this before.
You are conscientious. We leave you now, my friends.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the infinite Creator. Go
forth, then, rejoicing merrily in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.
                                       64
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 37
                             March 12, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: You said that each third-density entity has an higher self in the
sixth-density which is moving to the mind/body/spirit complex of the entity
as needed. Does this higher self also evolve in growth through the densities
beginning with the first-density, and does each higher self have a
corresponding higher self advanced in densities beyond it?
Ra: I am Ra. To simplify this concept is our intent. The higher self is a
manifestation given to the late sixth-density mind/body/spirit complex as a
gift from its future selfness. The mid-seventh density’s last action before
turning towards the allness of the Creator and gaining spiritual mass is to
give this resource to the sixth-density self, moving as you measure time in
the stream of time.
This self, the mind/body/spirit complex of late sixth-density, has then the
honor/duty of using both the experiences of its total living bank of memory
of experience, thoughts, and actions, and using the resource of the
mind/body/spirit complex totality left behind as a type of infinitely complex
thought-form.
In this way you may see your self, your higher self or Oversoul, and your
mind/body/spirit complex totality as three points in a circle. The only
distinction is that of your time/space continuum. All are the same being.
Questioner: Does each entity have an individual mind/body/spirit complex
totality or do a number of entities share the same mind/body/spirit complex
totality?
Ra: I am Ra. Both of these statements are correct given the appropriate
time/space conditions. Each entity has its totality and at the point at which
a planetary entity becomes a social memory complex the totality of this
union of entities also has its Oversoul and its social memory complex
totality as resource. As always, the sum, spiritually speaking, is greater than
the sum of its parts so that the Oversoul of a social memory complex is not
the sum of the Oversouls of its member entities but operates upon the way
of what we have called squares and what we grasp you prefer to call
doubling.
Questioner: Thank you. And thank you for that explanation of the
mathematics too. Could you define spiritual mass?
                                       65
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 37

Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this session.
Spiritual mass is that which begins to attract the out-moving and on-going
vibratory oscillations of being-ness into the gravity, speaking in a spiritual
sense, well of the great central sun, core, or Creator of the infinite universes.
Questioner: Since we don’t want to tire the instrument I will just ask if
there is anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable
or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. We leave you now in the love and the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                       66
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 38
                            March 13, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Backtracking just a little bit today I would like to know if the
reason nuclear energy was brought into this density forty or so years ago had
anything to do with giving the entities who were here who had caused the
destruction of Maldek another chance to use nuclear energy peacefully
rather than destructively?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect in that it places cart before horse, as your
people say. The desire for this type of information attracted this data to
your people. It was not given for a reason from outside influences; rather it
was desired by your peoples. From this point forward your reasoning is
correct in that entities had desired the second chance which you mentioned.
Questioner: What was the mechanism for fulfilling the desire for the
information regarding nuclear energy?
Ra: I am Ra. As we understand your query the mechanism was what you
may call inspiration.
Questioner: Would this inspiration be an entity impressing the person
desiring the information with thoughts? Would this be the mechanism of
inspiration?
Ra: I am Ra. The mechanism of inspiration involves an extraordinary
faculty of desire or will to know or to receive in a certain area accompanied
by the ability to open to and trust in what you may call intuition.
Questioner: Could you tell me how each of the rays, red through violet,
would appear in a perfectly balanced and undistorted entity?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot tell you this for each balance is perfect and each
unique. We do not mean to be obscure.
Let us offer an example. In a particular entity, let us use as an example a
Wanderer; the rays may be viewed as extremely even, red, orange, yellow.
The green ray is extremely bright. This is, shall we say, balanced by a
dimmer indigo. Between these two the point of balance resides, the blue ray
of the communicator sparkling in strength above the ordinary. In the violet
ray we see this unique spectrograph, if you will, and at the same time the
pure violet surrounding the whole; this in turn, surrounded by that which
mixes the red and violet ray, indicating the integration of mind, body, and
                                      67
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 38

spirit; this surrounded in turn by the vibratory pattern of this entity’s true
density.
This description may be seen to be both unbalanced and in perfect balance.
The latter understanding is extremely helpful in dealing with other-selves.
The ability to feel blockages is useful only to the healer. There is not
properly a tiny fraction of judgment when viewing a balance in colors. Of
course when we see many of the energy plexi weakened and blocked, we
may understand that an entity has not yet grasped the baton and begun the
race. However, the potentials are always there. All the rays fully balanced are
there in waiting to be activated.
Perhaps another way to address your query is this: In the fully potentiated
entity the rays mount one upon the other with equal vibratory brilliance
and scintillating sheen until the surrounding color is white. This is what
you may call potentiated balance in third-density.
Questioner: Is it possible for a third-density planet to form a social memory
complex which operates in third-density?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible only in the latter or seventh portion of such a
density when entities are harmoniously readying for graduation.
Questioner: Could you give me an example of a planet of this nature, both
a third-density service-to-others type and a third-density service-to-self type
at this level of attainment?
Ra: I am Ra. As far as we are aware there are no negatively oriented third-
density social memory complexes. Positively oriented social memory
complexes of third-density are not unheard of but quite rare. However, an
entity from the star Sirius’ planetary body has approached this planetary
body twice. This entity is late third-density and is part of a third-density
social memory complex. This has been referred to in the previous material.
The social memory complex is properly a fourth-density phenomenon.
Questioner: I was wondering if that particular social memory complex from
the Sirius star evolved from trees?
Ra: I am Ra. This approaches correctness. Those second-density vegetation
forms which graduated into third-density upon this planet bearing the
name of Dog were close to the tree as you know it.
Questioner: I was also wondering, since action of a bellicose nature is
impossible as far as I understand vegetation, would they not have the
advantage as they move into third-density from second to not carry a racial
memory of a bellicose nature and therefore develop a more harmonious
society and accelerate their evolution in this nature?
                                       68
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 38

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, to become balanced and begin to
polarize properly it is then necessary to investigate movements of all kinds,
especially bellicosity.
Questioner: I am assuming, then, that their investigations of bellicosity
were primarily of the type that they extracted from Hixson’s memory rather
than warfare among themselves?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Entities of this heritage would find it nearly
impossible to fight. Indeed, their studies of movements of all kinds is their
form of meditation due to the fact that their activity is upon the level of
what you would call meditation and thus must be balanced, just as your
entities need constant moments of meditation to balance your activities.
Questioner: I believe that this is an important point for us in understanding
the balancing aspect of meditation since we have here its antithesis in
another type of evolution. These entities moved, we are told by Charlie
Hixson, without moving their legs. I am assuming that they used a principle
that is somewhat similar to the principle of movement of your crystal bells
in the movement of their physical vehicles. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially incorrect.
Questioner: I am assuming that their method of movement is not a
function of mechanical leverage such as ours, but a direct function of the
mind somehow connected with the magnetic action of a planet. Is this
right?
Ra: I am Ra. This is largely correct. It is an electromagnetic phenomenon
which is controlled by thought impulses of a weak electrical nature.
Questioner: Would their craft have been visible to anyone on our planet in
that area at that time? Is it of a third-density material like this chair?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Please ask one more full question before we
close as this instrument has low vital energy at this space/time.
Questioner: Could you give me some idea of what conditions are like on a
fourth-density negative or service to self planet?
Ra: I am Ra. The graduation into fourth-density negative is achieved by
those beings who have consciously contacted intelligent infinity through the
use of red, orange, and yellow rays of energy. Therefore, the planetary
conditions of fourth-density negative include the constant alignment and
realignment of entities in efforts to form dominant patterns of combined
energy.


                                      69
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 38

The early fourth-density is one of the most intensive struggle. When the
order of authority has been established and all have fought until convinced
that each is in the proper placement for power structure, the social memory
complex begins. Always the fourth-density effect of telepathy and the
transparency of thought are attempted to be used for the sake of those at the
apex of the power structure.
This, as you may see, is often quite damaging to the further polarization of
fourth-density negative entities, for the further negative polarization can
come about only through group effort. As the fourth-density entities
manage to combine, they then polarize through such services to self as those
offered by the crusaders of Orion.
You may ask more specific questions in the next session of working. Are
there any brief queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: I would just ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. We leave you in the love and light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
Creator. Adonai.




                                     70
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 39
                            March 16, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I noticed that most of the basic things seemed to be divided
into units which total seven. In looking at a transcript by Henry Puharich
of “The Nine” I found a statement by The Nine where they say, “If we get
seven times the electrical equivalent of the human body then it would result
in sevenon of the mass of electricity.” Could you explain this?
Ra: I am Ra. To explain this is beyond the abilities of your language. We
shall, however, make an attempt to address this concept.
As you are aware, in the beginning of the creations set up by each Logos,
there are created the complete potentials, both electrical, in the sense the
one you call Larson intends, and metaphysical. This metaphysical electricity
is as important in the understanding, shall we say, of this statement as is the
concept of electricity.
This concept, as you are aware, deals with potentiated energy. The electron
has been said to have no mass but only a field. Others claim a mass of
infinitesimal measure. Both are correct. The true mass of the potentiated
energy is the strength of the field. This is also true metaphysically.
However, in your present physical system of knowledge it is useful to take
the mass number of the electron in order to do work that you may find
solutions to other questions about the physical universe. In such a way, you
may conveniently consider each density of being to have a greater and
greater spiritual mass. The mass increases, shall we say, significantly but not
greatly until the gateway density. In this density the summing up, the
looking backwards—in short—all the useful functions of polarity have been
used. Therefore, the metaphysical electrical nature of the individual grows
greater and greater in spiritual mass.
For an analog one may observe the work of the one known as Albert who
posits the growing to infinity of mass as this mass approaches the speed of
light. Thus the seventh-density being, the completed being, the Creator
who knows Itself, accumulates mass and compacts into the one Creator
once again.
Questioner: Then in the equation here I am assuming Mi is spiritual mass.
Mi = (mo C2)/(1 - v2 / c2)½

                                      71
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 39

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you tell me what this transmission from “The
Nine” means. “CH is a principle which is the revealing principle of
knowledge and of law”? Can you tell me what that principle is?
Ra: I am Ra. The principle so veiled in that statement is but the simple
principle of the constant or Creator and the transient or the incarnate being
and the yearning existing between the two, one for the other, in love and
light amidst the distortions of free will acting upon the illusion-bound
entity.
Questioner: Was the reason “The Nine” transmitted this principle in this
form the first distortion?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Can you tell me why they gave the principle in such a veiled
form then?
Ra: I am Ra. The scribe is most interested in puzzles and equations.
Questioner: I see. “The Nine” describe themselves as the “nine principals of
God.” Can you tell me what they mean by that?
Ra: I am Ra. This is also a veiled statement. The attempt is made to
indicate that the nine who sit upon the Council are those representing the
Creator, the one Creator, just as there may be nine witnesses in a courtroom
testifying for one defendant. The term principal has this meaning also.
The desire of the scribe may be seen in much of this material to have
affected the manner of its presentation just as the abilities and preferences of
this group determine the nature of this contact. The difference lies in the
fact that we are as we are. Thus we may either speak as we will or not speak
at all. This demands a very tuned, shall we say, group.
Questioner: I sense that there is fruitful ground for investigation of our
development in tracing the evolution of the bodily energy centers because
these seven centers seem to be linked with all of the sevens that I spoke of
previously, and these seem to be central to our own development. Could
you describe the process of evolution of these bodily energy centers starting
with the most primitive form of life to have them?
Ra: I am Ra. This material has been covered previously to some extent.
Therefore, we shall not repeat information upon which rays dwell in first
and second density and the wherefores of this, but rather attempt to enlarge
upon this information.

                                      72
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 39

The basic pivotal points of each level of development; that is, each density
beyond second, may be seen to be as follows: Firstly, the basic energy of so-
called red ray. This ray may be understood to be the basic strengthening ray
for each density. It shall never be condescended to as less important or
productive of spiritual evolution, for it is the foundation ray.
The next foundation ray is yellow. This is the great steppingstone ray. At
this ray the mind/body potentiates to its fullest balance. The strong
red/orange/yellow triad springboards the entity into the center ray of green.
This is again a basic ray but not a primary ray.
This is the resource for spiritual work. When green ray has been activated
we find the third primary ray being able to begin potentiation. This is the
first true spiritual ray in that all transfers are of an integrated
mind/body/spirit nature. The blue ray seats the learnings/teachings of the
spirit in each density within the mind/body complex animating the whole,
communicating to others this entirety of being-ness.
The indigo ray, though precious, is that ray worked upon only by the adept,
as you would call it. It is the gateway to intelligent infinity bringing
intelligent energy through. This is the energy center worked upon in those
teachings considered inner, hidden, and occult, for this ray is that which is
infinite in its possibilities. As you are aware, those who heal, teach, and
work for the Creator in any way which may be seen to be both radiant and
balanced are those activities which are indigo ray.
As you are aware, the violet ray is constant and does not figure into a
discussion of the functions of ray activation in that it is the mark, the
register, the identity, the true vibration of an entity.
Questioner: In order to clarify a little bit I would like to ask this question:
If we have a highly polarized entity polarized towards service to others and a
highly polarized entity polarized towards service to self, what would be the
difference in the red ray of these two entities?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full question of this working.
There is no difference in equally strongly polarized positive and negative
entities as regards red ray.
Questioner: Is this also true of all of the other rays?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall answer briefly. You may question further at another
working.
The negative ray pattern is the red/orange/yellow moving directly to the
blue, this only being used in order to contact intelligent infinity.

                                       73
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 39

In positively oriented entities the configuration is even, crystallinely clear,
and of the seven ray description.
Are there any short queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: I would just ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable and to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. You are most conscientious. All is well. I leave you, my
friends, in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth
therefore rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                       74
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 40
                            March 18, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the infinite Creator.
We communicate now.
Questioner: I thought that I would make a statement and let you correct it.
I’m trying to make a simple model of the portion of the universe that we
find ourselves in. Starting with the sub-Logos, our sun, we have white light
emanating from this which is made up of the frequencies ranging from the
red to the violet. I am assuming that this white light then contains the
experiences through all of the densities and as we go into the eighth density
we go into a black hole which becomes, on the other side, another Logos or
sun and starts another octave of experience. Can you comment on this part
of my statement?
Ra: I am Ra. We can comment upon this statement to an extent. The
concept of the white light of the sub-Logos being prismatically separated
and later, at the final chapter, being absorbed again is basically correct.
However, there are subtleties involved which are more than semantic.
The white light which emanates and forms the articulated sub-Logos has its
beginning in what may be metaphysically seen as darkness. The light comes
into that darkness and transfigures it, causing the chaos to organize and
become reflective or radiant. Thus the dimensions come into being.
Conversely, the blackness of the black hole, metaphysically speaking, is a
concentration of white light being systematically absorbed once again into
the one Creator. Finally, this absorption into the one Creator continues
until all the infinity of creations have attained sufficient spiritual mass in
order that all form once again the great central sun, if you would so imagine
it, of the intelligent infinity awaiting potentiation by free will. Thus the
transition of the octave is a process which may be seen to enter into
timelessness of unimaginable nature. To attempt to measure it by your time
measures would be useless.
Therefore, the concept of moving through the black hole of the ultimate
spiritual gravity well and coming immediately into the next octave misses
the subconcept or corollary of the portion of this process which is timeless.
Questioner: Our astronomers have noticed that light from spiral galaxies is
approximately seventy times less than it should be, considering the
calculated mass of the galaxy. I was wondering if that was due to the
increase of spiritual mass in the galaxy in what we call white dwarf stars?

                                      75
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 40

Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct and is a portion of the way or process
of creation’s cycle.
Questioner: Thank you. I was also wondering if the first-density
corresponded somehow to the color red, the second to the color orange, the
third to the color yellow and so on through the densities corresponding to
the colors in perhaps a way so that the basic vibration which forms the
photon that forms the core of all atomic particles would have a relationship
to the color in the density and that that vibration would step up for second,
third, and fourth-density corresponding to the increase in the vibration of
the colors. Is any of this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is more correct than you have stated. Firstly, you are
correct in positing a quantum, if you will, as the nature of each density and
further correct in assuming that these quanta may be seen to be of vibratory
natures corresponding to color as you grasp this word. However, it is also
true, as you have suspected but not asked, that each density is of the
metaphysical characteristic complex of its ray. Thus in first-density the red
ray is the foundation for all that is to come. In second density the orange
ray is that of movement and growth of the individual, this ray striving
towards the yellow ray of self-conscious manifestations of a social nature as
well as individual; third-density being the equivalent, and so forth, each
density being primarily its ray plus the attractions of the following ray
pulling it forward in evolution and to some extent coloring or shading the
chief color of that density.
Questioner: Then bodily energy centers for an individual, assuming that
the individual evolves in a straight line from first through to eighth density,
would then be activated to completion if everything worked as it should?
Would each chakra be activated to completion and greatest intensity by the
end of the experience in each density?
Ra: I am Ra. Hypothetically speaking, this is correct. However, the fully
activated being is rare. Much emphasis is laid upon the harmonies and
balances of individuals. It is necessary for graduation across densities for the
primary energy centers to be functioning in such a way as to communicate
with intelligent infinity and to appreciate and bask in this light in all of its
purity. However, to fully activate each energy center is the mastery of few,
for each center has a variable speed of rotation or activity. The important
observation to be made once all necessary centers are activated to the
minimal necessary degree is the harmony and balance between these energy
centers.
Questioner: Thank you. Taking as an example the transition between
second and third-density, when this transition takes place, does the
                                       76
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 40

frequency of vibration which forms the photon (the core of all the particles
of the density) increase from a frequency corresponding to second density
or the color orange to the frequency that we measure as the color yellow?
What I am getting at is, do all the vibrations that form the density, the basic
vibrations of the photon, increase in a quantum fashion over a relatively
short period of time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Then you see within each density the gradual
up-grading of vibratory levels.
Questioner: This is a guess. Would the frequency going from second to
third increase from the middle orange or average orange frequency to the
middle or average yellow frequency?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is indeterminate. We shall attempt to be of aid.
However, the frequency that is the basis of each density is what may be
called a true color. This term is impossible to define given your system of
sensibilities and scientific measurements, for color has vibratory
characteristics both in space/time and in time/space. The true color is then
overlaid and tinged by the rainbow of the various vibratory levels within
that density and the attraction vibrations of the next true color density.
Questioner: How long was the time of transition from second to third-
density? A generation and a half I believe you said. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, the time measured in your years being
approximately 1,350.
Questioner: Then what will be the time of transition on this planet from
third to fourth-density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is difficult to estimate due to the uncharacteristic
anomalies of this transition. There are at this space/time nexus beings
incarnate which have begun fourth-density work. However, the third-
density climate of planetary consciousness is retarding the process. At this
particular nexus the possibility/probability vortices indicate somewhere
between 100 and 700 of your years as transition period. This cannot be
accurate due to the volatility of your peoples at this space/time.
Questioner: Has the vibration of the photon increased in frequency already?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. It is this influence which has begun to cause
thoughts to become things. As an example you may observe the thoughts of
anger becoming those cells of the physical bodily complex going out of
control to become what you call the cancer.



                                      77
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 40

Questioner: I am assuming that this vibratory increase began about twenty
to thirty years ago. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The first harbingers of this were approximately forty-five of
your years ago, the energies vibrating more intensely through the forty year
period preceding the final movement of vibratory matter, shall we say,
through the quantum leap, as you would call it.
Questioner: Starting then, forty-five years ago, and taking the entire
increase of vibration that we will experience in this density change,
approximately what percentage through this increase in vibrational change
are we right now?
Ra: I am Ra. The vibratory nature of your environment is true color, green.
This is at this time heavily over-woven with the orange ray of planetary
consciousness. However, the nature of quanta is such that the movement
over the boundary is that of discrete placement of vibratory level.
Questioner: You mentioned that the thoughts of anger now are causing
cancer. Can you expand on this mechanism as it acts as a catalyst or its
complete purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth-density is one of revealed information. Selves are
not hidden to self or other-selves. The imbalances or distortions which are
of a destructive nature show, therefore, in more obvious ways, the vehicle of
the mind/body/spirit complex thus acting as a teaching resource for self
revelation. These illnesses such as cancer are correspondingly very amenable
to self-healing once the mechanism of the destructive influence has been
grasped by the individual.
Questioner: Then you are saying that cancer is quite easily healed mentally
and is a good teaching tool because it is easily healed mentally and once the
entity forgives the other-self at whom he is angry the cancer will disappear.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The other portion of healing has to do
with forgiveness of self and a greatly heightened respect for the self. This
may conveniently be expressed by taking care in dietary matters. This is
quite frequently a part of the healing and forgiving process. Your basic
premise is correct.
Questioner: In dietary matters, what would be the foods that one would
include and what would be the foods that one would exclude in a general
way for the greatest care of one’s bodily complex?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, we underline and emphasize that this information is
not to be understood literally but as a link or psychological nudge for the
                                     78
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 40

body and the mind and spirit. Thus it is the care and respect for the self
that is the true thing of importance. In this light we may iterate the basic
information given for this instrument’s diet. The vegetables, the fruits, the
grains, and to the extent necessary for the individual metabolism, the
animal products. These are those substances showing respect for the self. In
addition, though this has not been mentioned for this instrument is not in
need of purification, those entities in need of purging the self of a poison
thought-form or emotion complex do well to take care in following a
program of careful fasting until the destructive thought-form has been
purged analogously with the by-products of ridding the physical vehicle of
excess material. Again you see the value not to the body complex but used
as a link for the mind and spirit. Thus self reveals self to self.
Questioner: Thank you. A very important concept. Does the fact that the
basic vibration that we experience now is green true color or fourth-density
account for the fact that there are many mental effects upon material objects
that are now observable for the first time in a mass way such as the bending
of metal by mind?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the final query in total of this working. This is
not only correct but we suggest you take this concept further and
understand the great number of entities with the so-called mental diseases
being due to the effect of this green ray true color upon the mental
configurations of those unready mentally to face the self for the first time.
Are there any brief queries before we close?
Questioner: Just two. With respect to what you just said, would then
people incarnating here by seniority of vibration who incarnate in the
service-to-self path be ones who would have extreme difficulty mentally
with this green ray vibration?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. It is rather the numbers who have distracted
themselves and failed to prepare for this transition yet who are somewhat
susceptible to its influence who may be affected.
Questioner: Thank you. Is there anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: This instrument is well. You are conscientious. The appurtenances
cause this instrument greater comfort in the distortion of the warmth of the
body complex. I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light
of the one infinite Creator. Go forth then rejoicing in the power and in the
peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.



                                      79
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 41
                             March 20, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I have one question of logistics to start with. I know that it is a
dumb question, but I have to ask it to be sure. There is a possibility that we
may have to move from this location. Will this have any effect at all on our
contact with Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a foolish question. The location is meaningless, for
are we not in the creation? However, the place of the working shall be either
carefully adjudged by your selves to be of the appropriate vibratory levels or
it shall be suggested that the purification of the place be enacted and
dedication made through meditation before initial working. This might
entail such seemingly mundane chores as the cleansing or painting of
surfaces which you may deem to be inappropriately marred.
Questioner: I am familiar with the Banishing Ritual of the Lesser
Pentagram. I was wondering if this ritual was of use in preparing a place for
this type of working?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: In trying to build an understanding from the start, you might
say, starting with intelligent infinity and getting to our present condition of
being I think that I should go back and investigate our sun since it is the
sub-Logos that creates all that we experience in this particular planetary
system.
Will you give me a description of our sun?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a query which is not easily answered in your language,
for the sun has various aspects in relation to intelligent infinity, to
intelligent energy, and to each density of each planet, as you call these
spheres. Moreover, these differences extend into the metaphysical or
time/space part of your creation.
In relationship to intelligent infinity, the sun body is, equally with all parts
of the infinite creation, part of that infinity.
In relation to the potentiated intelligent infinity which makes use of
intelligent energy, it is the offspring, shall we say, of the Logos for a much
larger number of sub-Logoi. The relationship is hierarchical in that the sub-
Logos uses the intelligent energy in ways set forth by the Logos and uses its
                                       80
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

free will to co-create the, shall we say, full nuances of your densities as you
experience them.
In relationship to the densities, the sun body may physically, as you would
say, be seen to be a large body of gaseous elements undergoing the processes
of fusion and radiating heat and light.
Metaphysically, the sun achieves a meaning to fourth through seventh
density according to the growing abilities of entities in these densities to
grasp the living creation and co-entity, or other-self, nature of this sun
body. Thus by the sixth density the sun may be visited and inhabited by
those dwelling in time/space and may even be partially created from
moment to moment by the processes of sixth density entities in their
evolution.
Questioner: In your last statement did you mean that the sixth density
entities are actually creating manifestations of the sun in their density?
Could you explain what you meant by that?
Ra: I am Ra. In this density some entities whose means of reproduction is
fusion may choose to perform this portion of experience as part of the
beingness of the sun body. Thus you may think of portions of the light that
you receive as offspring of the generative expression of sixth-density love.
Questioner: Then could you say that sixth-density entities are using that
mechanism to be more closely co-Creators with the infinite Creator?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct as seen in the latter portions of sixth
density seeking the experiences of the gateway density.
Questioner: Thank you. What I want to do now is investigate, as the first-
density is formed, what happens and how energy centers are first formed in
beings. Does it make any sense to ask you if the sun itself has a density, or is
it all densities?
Ra: I am Ra. The sub-Logos is of the entire octave and is not that entity
which experiences the learning/teachings of entities such as yourselves.
Questioner: I am going to make a statement of my understanding and ask
you to correct me. I intuitively see the first-density being formed by an
energy center which is a vortex. This vortex then causes these spinning
motions that I have mentioned before of vibration which is light which then
starts to condense into materials of the first-density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct as far as your reasoning has taken you.
However, it is well to point out that the Logos has the plan of all the
densities of the octave in potential completion before entering the

                                       81
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

space/time continuum in first-density. Thus the energy centers exist before
they are manifest.
Questioner: Then what is the simplest being that is manifested? I am
supposing that it might be a single cell or something like that. How does it
function with respect to energy centers?
Ra: I am Ra. The simplest manifest being is light or what you have called
the photon. In relationship to energy centers it may be seen to be the center
or foundation of all articulated energy fields.
Questioner: When first-density is formed we have fire, air, earth, and water.
There is at some time the first movement or individuation of life into a
portion of consciousness that is self-mobile. Could you describe the process
of the creation of this and what type of energy center it has?
Ra: I am Ra. The first or red-ray density, though attracted towards growth,
is not in the proper vibration for those conditions conducive to what you
may call the spark of awareness. As the vibratory energies move from red to
orange the vibratory environment is such as to stimulate those chemical
substances which lately had been inert to combine in such a fashion that
love and light begin the function of growth.
The supposition which you had earlier made concerning single-celled
entities such as the polymorphous dynaflagallate is correct. The mechanism
is one of the attraction of upward spiraling light. There is nothing random
about this or any portion of evolution.
Questioner: As I remember, the polymorphous dynaflagallate has an iron
rather than a copper based cell. Could you comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. This information is not central. The base of any metabolism,
shall we say, is that which may be found in the chemical substances of the
neighborhood of origin.
Questioner: I was just commenting on this because it has the motion of our
animal life with copper based cells yet it has the iron based cell of plant life
indicating a transition from possibly plant to animal life. Am I wrong? My
memory is a little fuzzy on this.
Ra: I am Ra. It is not that you are incorrect but that no conclusions should
be drawn from such information. There are several different types of bases
for conscious entities not only upon this planetary sphere but to a much
greater extent in the forms found on planetary spheres of other sub-Logoi.
The chemical vehicle is that which most conveniently houses the
consciousness. The functioning of consciousness is the item of interest
rather than the chemical makeup of a physical vehicle.
                                       82
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

We have observed that those whom you call scientists have puzzled over the
various differences and possible interrelationships of various stages, types,
and conditions of life-forms. This is not fruitful material as it is that which
is of a moment’s choice by your sub-Logos.
Questioner: I didn’t mean to waste time with that question but you just
happened to mention that particular single cell. Does this polymorphous
dynaflagallate have an orange energy center?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is this energy center, then, on a very small scale related to the
orange energy center in man?
Ra: I am Ra. The true color is precisely the same. However, the
consciousness of the second-density beginning is primitive and the use of
orange ray limited to the expression of self which may be seen to be
movement and survival.
In third-density, at this time, those clinging to orange ray have a much
more complex system of distortions through which orange ray is
manifested. This is somewhat complicated. We shall endeavor to simplify.
The appropriate true color for third-density is, as you have ascertained,
yellow. However, the influences of the true color, green, acting upon yellow
ray entities have caused many entities to revert to the consideration of self
rather than the stepping forward into consideration of other-self or green
ray. This may not be seen to be of a negatively polarized nature, as the
negatively polarized entity is working very intensively with the deepest
manifestations of yellow ray group energies, especially the manipulations of
other-self for service to self. Those reverting to orange ray, and we may add
these are many upon your plane at this time, are those who feel the
vibrations of true color green and, therefore, respond by rejecting
governmental and societal activities as such and seek once more the self.
However, not having developed the yellow ray properly so that it balances
the personal vibratory rates of the entity, the entity then is faced with the
task of further activation and balancing of the self in relation to the self,
thus the orange ray manifestations at this space/time nexus.
Thus true color orange is that which it is without difference. However, the
manifestations of this or any ray may be seen to be most various depending
upon the vibratory levels and balances of the mind/body or
mind/body/spirit complexes which are expressing these energies.
Questioner: Could you tell me the simplest and first entity to have both
orange and yellow ray energy centers?
                                      83
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

Ra: I am Ra. Upon your planetary sphere those having the first yellow ray
experiences are those of animal and vegetable natures which find the
necessity for reproduction by bisexual techniques or who find it necessary to
depend in some way upon otherselves for survival and growth.
Questioner: And then what entity would be the simplest that would have
red, orange, yellow, and green rays activated?
Ra: I am Ra. This information has been covered in a previous session. To
perhaps simplify your asking, each center may be seen to be activated
potentially in third-density, the late second-density entities having the
capability, if efficient use is made of experience, of vibrating and activating
the green ray energy center.
The third-density being, having the potential for complete self-awareness,
thus has the potential for the minimal activation of all energy centers. The
fourth, fifth, and sixth densities are those refining the higher energy centers.
The seventh density is a density of completion and the turning towards
timelessness or foreverness.
Questioner: Then would an animal in second-density have all of the energy
centers in some way in its being but just not activated?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.
Questioner: Then the animal in second-density is composed of light as are
all things. What I am trying to get at is the relationship between the light
that the various bodies of the animal are created of and the relationship of
this to the energy centers which are active and the ones which are not active
and how this is linked with the Logos. It is a difficult question to ask. Can
you give me some kind of answer?
Ra: I am Ra. The answer is to redirect your thought processes from any
mechanical view of evolution. The will of the Logos posits the potentials
available to the evolving entity. The will of the entity as it evolves is the
single measure of the rate and fastidiousness of the activation and balancing
of the various energy centers.
Questioner: Thank you. In the session from the day before yesterday you
mentioned variable speed of rotation or activity of energy centers. What did
you mean by that?
Ra: I am Ra. Each energy center has a wide range of rotational speed or as
you may see it more clearly in relation to color, brilliance. The more
strongly the will of the entity concentrates upon and refines or purifies each
energy center, the more brilliant or rotationally active each energy center
will be. It is not necessary for the energy centers to be activated in order in
                                       84
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

the case of the self-aware entity. Thusly entities may have extremely brilliant
energy centers while being quite unbalanced in their violet ray aspect due to
lack of attention paid to the totality of experience of the entity.
The key to balance may then be seen in the unstudied, spontaneous, and
honest response of entities toward experiences, thus using experience to the
utmost, then applying the balancing exercises and achieving the proper
attitude for the most purified spectrum of energy center manifestation in
violet ray. This is why the brilliance or rotational speed of the energy centers
is not considered above the balanced aspect or violet ray manifestation of an
entity in regarding harvestability; for those entities which are unbalanced,
especially as to the primary rays, will not be capable of sustaining the impact
of the love and light of intelligent infinity to the extent necessary for
harvest.
Questioner: Could you tell me the difference between space/time and
time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. Using your words, the difference is that between the visible
and invisible or the physical and metaphysical. Using mathematical terms,
as does the one you call Larson, the difference is that between s/t and t/s.
Questioner: You mentioned in the last session the concept of fasting for
removing unwanted thought-forms. Can you expand on this process and
explain a little bit more about how this works?
Ra: I am Ra. This, as all healing techniques, must be used by a conscious
being; that is, a being conscious that the ridding of excess and unwanted
material from the body complex is the analogy to the ridding of mind or
spirit of excess or unwanted material. Thus the one discipline or denial of
the unwanted portion as an appropriate part of the self is taken through the
tree of mind down through the trunk to subconscious levels where the
connection is made and thus the body, mind, and spirit, then in unison,
express denial of the excess or unwanted spiritual or mental material as part
of the entity.
All then falls away and the entity, while understanding, if you will, and
appreciating the nature of the rejected material as part of the greater self,
nevertheless, through the action of the will purifies and refines the
mind/body/spirit complex, bringing into manifestation the desired mind
complex or spirit complex attitude.
Questioner: Then would this be like a conscious reprogramming of
catalyst? For instance, for some entities catalyst is programmed by the
higher self to create experiences so that the entity can release itself from
unwanted biases. Would this be analogous then to the entity consciously
                                       85
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

programming this release and using fasting as the method of
communication to itself?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not only correct but may be taken further. The self, if
conscious to a great enough extent of the workings of this catalyst and the
techniques of programming, may through concentration of the will and the
faculty of faith alone cause reprogramming without the analogy of the
fasting, the diet, or other analogous body complex disciplines.
Questioner: I have a book, INITIATION, in which the woman describes
initiation. Are you familiar with the contents of this book?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We scan your mind.
Questioner: I have only read part of it, but I was wondering if the teachings
in the book with respect to balancing were Ra’s teachings?
Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct with distortions that may be seen
when this material is collated with the material we have offered.
Questioner: Why are the red, yellow, and blue energy centers called
primary centers? I think from previous material I understand this, but is
there some tracing of these primary colors back to intelligent infinity more
profound than what you have given us?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot say what may seem profound to an entity. The red,
yellow, and blue rays are primary because they signify activity of a primary
nature.
Red ray is the foundation; orange ray the movement towards yellow ray
which is the ray of self-awareness and interaction. Green ray is the
movement through various experiences of energy exchanges having to do
with compassion and all-forgiving love to the primary blue ray which is the
first ray of radiation of self regardless of any actions from another.
The green-ray entity is ineffectual in the face of blockage from other-selves.
The blue ray entity is a co-Creator. This may perhaps simply be a
restatement of previous activity, but if you consider the function of the
Logos as representative of the infinite Creator in effectuating the knowing
of the Creator by the Creator you may perhaps see the steps by which this
may be accomplished.
May we ask for one final full question before we leave this working?
Questioner: This may be too long a question for this working, but I will ask
it and if it is too long we can continue it at a later time. Could you tell me
of the development of the social memory complex Ra, from its first

                                      86
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 41

beginnings and what catalysts it used to get to where it is now in activation
of rays?
Ra: I am Ra. The question does not demand a long answer, for we who
experienced the vibratory densities upon that planetary sphere which you
call Venus were fortunate in being able to move in harmony with the
planetary vibrations with an harmonious graduation to second, to third, and
to fourth, and a greatly accelerated fourth-density experience.
We spent much time/space, if you will, in fifth-density balancing the
intense compassion we had gained in fourth-density. The graduation again
was harmonious and our social memory complex which had become most
firmly cemented in fourth-density remained of a very strong and helpful
nature.
Our sixth-density work was also accelerated because of the harmony of our
social memory complex so that we were able to set out as members of the
Confederation to even more swiftly approach graduation to seventh-density.
Our harmony, however, has been a grievous source of naiveté as regards
working with your planet. Is there a brief query before we leave this
instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light
of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and
the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      87
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 42
                            March 22, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I am going to make a statement and ask you to comment on its
degree of accuracy. I am assuming that the balanced entity would not be
swayed either towards positive or negative emotions by any situation which
he might confront. By remaining unemotional in any situation, the
balanced entity may clearly discern the appropriate and necessary responses
in harmony with the Law of One for each situation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is an incorrect application of the balancing which we
have discussed. The exercise of first experiencing feelings and then
consciously discovering their antitheses within the being has as its objective
not the smooth flow of feelings both positive and negative while remaining
unswayed but rather the objective of becoming unswayed. This is a simpler
result and takes much practice, shall we say.
The catalyst of experience works in order for the learn/teachings of this
density to occur. However, if there is seen in the being a response, even if it
is simply observed, the entity is still using the catalyst for learn/teaching.
The end result is that the catalyst is no longer needed. Thus this density is
no longer needed. This is not indifference or objectivity but a finely tuned
compassion and love which sees all things as love. This seeing elicits no
response due to catalytic reactions. Thus the entity is now able to become
co-Creator of experiential occurrences. This is the truer balance.
Questioner: I will attempt to make an analogy. If an animal, shall I say, a
bull, in a pen attacks you because you have wandered into his pen, you get
out of his way rapidly but you do not blame him. You do not have much of
an emotional response other than the response that he might damage you.
However, if you encounter another self in his territory and he attacks you,
your response may be more of an emotional nature creating physical bodily
responses. Am I correct in assuming that when your response to the animal
and to the other-self is that of seeing both as Creator and loving both and
understanding their action in attacking you is the action of their free will
then you have balanced yourself correctly in this area? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct. However, the balanced entity will see
in the seeming attack of an other-self the causes of this action which are, in
most cases, of a more complex nature than the cause of the attack of the

                                      88
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 42

second-density bull as was your example. Thus this balanced entity would
be open to many more opportunities for service to a third-density other-self.
Questioner: Would a perfectly balanced entity feel any emotional response
in being attacked by the other-self?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The response is love.
Questioner: In the illusion that we now experience it is difficult to maintain
this response especially if the attack results in physical pain, but I assume
that this response should be maintained even through physical pain or loss
of life. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and further is of a major or principle
importance in understanding, shall we say, the principle of balance. Balance
is not indifference but rather the observer not blinded by any feelings of
separation but rather fully imbued with love.
Questioner: In the last session you made the statement that “We, that is Ra,
spent much time/space in the fifth-density balancing the intense
compassion that we had gained in the fourth-density.” Could you expand
on this concept with respect to the material you just discussed?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth-density, as we have said, abounds in compassion.
This compassion is folly when seen through the eyes of wisdom. It is the
salvation of third-density but creates a mismatch in the ultimate balance of
the entity.
Thus we, as a social memory complex of fourth-density, had the tendency
towards compassion even to martyrdom in aid of other-selves. When the
fifth-density harvest was achieved we found that in this vibratory level flaws
could be seen in the efficacy of such unrelieved compassion. We spent
much time/space in contemplation of those ways of the Creator which
imbue love with wisdom.
Questioner: I would like to try to make an analogy for third-density of this
concept. Many entities here feel great compassion for relieving the physical
problems of third-density other-selves by administering to them in many
ways, with food if there is hunger as there is now in the African nations, by
bringing them medicine if they feel that there is a need to minister to them
medically, and being selfless in all of these services to a very great extent.
This is creating a vibration that is in harmony with green-ray or fourth-
density but it is not balanced with the understanding of fifth-density that
these entities are experiencing catalysts and a more balanced administration
to their needs would be to provide them with the learning necessary to

                                      89
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 42

reach the state of awareness of fourth-density than it would be to minister
to their physical needs at this time. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. To a mind/body/spirit complex which is
starving, the appropriate response is the feeding of the body. You may
extrapolate from this.
On the other hand, however, you are correct in your assumption that the
green ray response is not as refined as that which has been imbued with
wisdom. This wisdom enables the entity to appreciate its contributions to
the planetary consciousness by the quality of its being without regard to
activity or behavior which expects results upon visible planes.
Questioner: Then why do we have the extreme starvation problem in,
generally, the area of Africa at this time? Is there any metaphysical reason
for this, or is it purely random?
Ra: I am Ra. Your previous assumption was correct as to the catalytic action
of this starvation and ill health. However, it is within the free will of an
entity to respond to this plight of otherselves, and the offering of the needed
foodstuffs and substances is an appropriate response within the framework
of your learn/teachings at this time which involve the growing sense of love
for and service to other-selves.
Questioner: What is the difference in terms of energy center activation
between a person who represses emotional responses to emotionally charged
situations and the person who is balanced and, therefore, truly unswayed by
emotionally charged situations?
Ra: I am Ra. This query contains an incorrect assumption. To the truly
balanced entity no situation would be emotionally charged. With this
understood, we may say the following: The repression of emotions
depolarizes the entity in so far as it then chooses not to use the catalytic
action of the space/time present in a spontaneous manner, thus dimming
the energy centers. There is, however, some polarization towards positive if
the cause of this repression is consideration for other-selves. The entity
which has worked long enough with the catalyst to be able to feel the
catalyst but not find it necessary to express reactions is not yet balanced but
suffers no depolarization due to the transparency of its experiential
continuum. Thus the gradual increase in the ability to observe one’s
reaction and to know the self will bring the self ever closer to a true balance.
Patience is requested and suggested, for the catalyst is intense upon your
plane and its use must be appreciated over a period of consistent
learn/teaching.


                                      90
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 42

Questioner: How can a person know when he is unswayed by an
emotionally charged situation or if he is repressing the flow of emotions, or
if he is in balance and truly unswayed?
Ra: I am Ra. We have spoken to this point. Therefore, we shall briefly
iterate that to the balanced entity no situation has an emotional charge but
is simply a situation like any other in which the entity may or may not
observe an opportunity to be of service. The closer an entity comes to this
attitude the closer an entity is to balance. You may note that it is not our
recommendation that reactions to catalyst be repressed or suppressed unless
such reactions would be a stumbling block not consonant with the Law of
One to an other-self. It is far, far better to allow the experience to express
itself in order that the entity may then make fuller use of this catalyst.
Questioner: How can an individual assess what energy centers within its
being are activated and in no immediate need of attention and which energy
centers are not activated and are in need of immediate attention?
Ra: I am Ra. The thoughts of an entity, its feelings or emotions, and least of
all its behavior are the signposts for the teaching/learning of self by self. In
the analysis of one’s experiences of a diurnal cycle an entity may assess what
it considers to be inappropriate thoughts, behaviors, feelings, and emotions.
In examining these inappropriate activities of mind, body, and spirit
complexes the entity may then place these distortions in the proper
vibrational ray and thus see where work is needed.
Questioner: In the last session you said, “that when the self is conscious to a
great enough extent of the workings of the catalyst of fasting, and the
techniques of programming, it then may through concentration of the will
and the faculty of faith alone cause reprogramming without the analogy of
fasting, diet, or other analogous bodily complex disciplines.” What are the
techniques of programming which the higher self uses to insure that the
desired lessons are learned or attempted by the third-density self?
Ra: I am Ra. There is but one technique for this growing or nurturing of
will and faith, and that is the focusing of the attention. The attention span
of those you call children is considered short. The spiritual attention span of
most of your peoples is that of the child. Thus it is a matter of wishing to
become able to collect one’s attention and hold it upon the desired
programming.
This, when continued, strengthens the will. The entire activity can only
occur when there exists faith that an outcome of this discipline is possible.



                                       91
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 42

Questioner: Can you mention some exercises for helping to increase the
attention span?
Ra: I am Ra. Such exercises are common among the many mystical
traditions of your entities. The visualization of a shape and color which is of
personal inspirational quality to the meditator is the heart of what you
would call the religious aspects of this sort of visualization.
The visualization of simple shapes and colors which have no innate
inspirational quality to the entity form the basis for what you may call your
magical traditions.
Whether you image the rose or the circle is not important. However, it is
suggested that one or the other path towards visualization be chosen in
order to exercise this faculty. This is due to the careful arrangement of
shapes and colors which have been described as visualizations by those
steeped in the magical tradition.
Questioner: As a youth I was trained in the engineering sciences which
include the necessity for three dimensional visualization for the processes of
design. Would this be helpful as a foundation for the type of visualization
which you are speaking of, or would it be of no value?
Ra: I am Ra. To you, the questioner, this experience was valuable. To a less
sensitized entity it would not gain the proper increase of concentrative
energy.
Questioner: Then the less sensitized entity should use … What should he
use for the proper energy?
Ra: I am Ra. In the less sensitized individual the choosing of personally
inspirational images is appropriate whether this inspiration be the rose
which is of perfect beauty, the cross which is of perfect sacrifice, the Buddha
which is the All-being in One, or whatever else may inspire the individual.
Questioner: Using the teach/learning relationship of parent to child, what
type of actions would demonstrate the activation of the energy centers in
sequence from red to violet?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
The entity, child or adult, as you call it, is not an instrument to be played.
The appropriate teach/learning device of parent to child is the open-hearted
being-ness of the parent and the total acceptance of the beingness of the
child. This will encompass whatever material the child entity has brought
into the life experience in this plane.


                                      92
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 42

There are two things especially important in this relationship other than the
basic acceptance of the child by the parent. Firstly, the experience of
whatever means the parent uses to worship and give thanksgiving to the one
infinite Creator, should if possible be shared with the child entity upon a
daily basis, as you would say. Secondly, the compassion of parent to child
may well be tempered by the understanding that the child entity shall learn
the biases of service-to-others or service-to-self from the parental other-self.
This is the reason that some discipline is appropriate in the teach/learning.
This does not apply to the activation of any one energy center for each
entity is unique and each relationship with self and other-self doubly
unique. The guidelines given are only general for this reason.
Is there a brief query before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument is well. I leave you, my friends, in the love and
the light of the infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and
the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                       93
             The Law of One, Book II, Session 43
                             March 24, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator.
Before we communicate may we request the adjustment, without the
touching of this instrument’s physical body complex, of the item which
presses upon the instrument’s head. This is causing some interference with
our contact.
Questioner: Is that the pillow or something else? Do you speak of the
pillow under the neck?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a line of interference crossing the crown of the head.
Questioner: Is it this? (A two inch fold in the sheet is located three inches from
the crown of the instrument’s head and is laid flat on the bed.) Is that it?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Please increase the distance from the crown of
the head.
Questioner: (Ruffles in the sheet are smoothed all along the length of the sheet
next to the instrument’s head.) Is this satisfactory?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: I am sorry that we failed to notice that.
Ra: We communicate now.
Questioner: I don’t know if it is of any importance, but it occurred to me
that the parts removed from the cattle mutilations are the same every time,
and I wondered if this is related to the energy centers and why they were
important if that was so?
Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct if you may understand that there is a
link between energy centers and various thought-forms. Thus the fears of
the mass consciousness create the climate for the concentration upon the
removal of bodily parts which symbolize areas of concern or fear in the mass
consciousness.
Questioner: Are you saying, then, that these parts that are removed are
related to the mass consciousness of the third-density human form and that
this fear is being used in some way by the thought-form entities in these
mutilations?


                                        94
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The thought-form entities feed upon fear; thus
they are able to do precise damage according to systems of symbology. The
other second-density types of which you speak need the, what you call,
blood.
Questioner: These other second-density types need the blood to remain in
the physical? Do they come in and out of our physical from one of the
lower astral planes?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities are, shall we say, creatures of the Orion group.
They do not exist in astral planes as do the thought-forms but wait within
the Earth’s surface. We, as always, remind you that it is our impression that
this type of information is unimportant.
Questioner: I agree with you wholeheartedly, but I sometimes am at a loss
before investigation into an area as to whether it is going to lead to a better
understanding. This just seemed to be related somehow to the energy
centers which we had been speaking of.
I am going to make a statement and have you comment on it for its
correctness. The statement is: When the Creator’s light is split or divided
into colors and energy centers for experience, then in order to reunite with
the Creator the energy centers must be balanced exactly the same as the split
light was as it originated from the Creator. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. To give this query a simple answer would be nearly
impossible.
We shall simplify by concentrating upon what we consider to be the central
idea towards which you are striving. We have, many times now, spoken
about the relative importance of balancing as opposed to the relative
unimportance of maximal activation of each energy center. The reason is as
you have correctly surmised. Thusly the entity is concerned, if it be upon
the path of positive harvestability, with the regularizing of the various
energies of experience. Thus the most fragile entity may be more balanced
than one with extreme energy and activity in service-to-others due to the
fastidiousness with which the will is focused upon the use of experience in
knowing the self. The densities beyond your own give the minimally
balanced individual much time/space and space/time with which to
continue to refine these inner balances.
Questioner: In the next density, the fourth density, is the catalyst of
physical pain used as a mechanism for experiential balancing?
Ra: I am Ra. The use of physical pain is minimal, having only to do with
the end of the fourth-density incarnation. This physical pain would not be

                                       95
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

considered severe enough to treat, shall we say, in third density. The
catalysts of mental and spiritual pain are used in fourth density.
Questioner: Why is physical pain a part of the end of fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. You would call this variety of pain weariness.
Questioner: Can you state the average lifespan in the fourth density of
space/time incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. The space/time incarnation typical of harmonious fourth
density is approximately 90,000 of your years as you measure time.
Questioner: Are there multiple incarnations in fourth density with
time/space experiences in between incarnations?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: How long is a cycle of experience in fourth density in our
years?
Ra: The cycle of experience is approximately 30 million of your years if the
entities are not capable of being harvested sooner. There is in this density a
harvest which is completely the function of the readiness of the social
memory complex. It is not structured as is your own, for it deals with a
more transparent distortion of the one infinite Creator.
Questioner: Then the big difference in harvestability between third and
fourth density is that at the end of the third density the individual is
harvested as a function of individual violet ray, but it is the violet-ray for the
entire social memory complex that must be of a harvestable nature to
graduate to the fifth density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct although in fifth density entities may choose to
learn as a social memory complex or as mind/body/spirit complexes and
may graduate to sixth density under these conditions, for the wisdom
density is an extremely free density whereas the lessons of compassion
leading to wisdom necessarily have to do with other-selves.
Questioner: Then is sixth-density harvest strictly of a social memory
complex nature because again we have wisdom and compassion blended
back using wisdom?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: The physical vehicle that is used in fourth-density space/time
is, I am assuming, quite similar to the one that is now used in third density.
Is this correct?

                                       96
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

Ra: I am Ra. The chemical elements used are not the same. However, the
appearance is similar.
Questioner: Is it necessary to eat food in fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: The mechanism of, shall we say, social catalyst due to a
necessity for feeding the body then is active in fourth-density. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The fourth-density being desires to serve and
the preparation of foodstuffs is extremely simple due to increased
communion between entity and living foodstuff. Therefore, this is not a
significant catalyst but rather a simple precondition of the space/time
experience. The catalyst involved is the necessity for the ingestion of
foodstuffs. This is not considered to be of importance by fourth-density
entities and it, therefore, aids in the teach/learning of patience.
Questioner: Could you expand a little bit on how that aids in the
teach/learning of patience?
Ra: I am Ra. To stop the functioning of service-to-others long enough to
ingest foodstuffs is to invoke patience.
Questioner: I’m guessing that it is not necessary to ingest foodstuffs in fifth-
density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. However, the vehicle needs food which may
be prepared by thought.
Questioner: What type of food would this be?
Ra: I am Ra. You would call this type of food, nectar or ambrosia, or a light
broth of golden white hue.
Questioner: What is the purpose of ingesting food in fifth density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a somewhat central point. The purpose of space/time is
the increase in catalytic action appropriate to the density. One of the
preconditions for space/time existence is some form of body complex. Such
a body complex must be fueled in some way.
Questioner: In third density the fueling of our bodily complex is not only
simply fueling of the bodily complex but gives us opportunities to learn
service. In fourth density it not only fuels the complex but gives us
opportunities to learn patience. In fifth density it fuels the complex but
does it teach?

                                      97
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

Ra: I am Ra. In fifth density it is comfort for those of like mind gathered
together to share in this broth, thus becoming one in light and wisdom
while joining hearts and hands in physical activity. Thus in this density it
becomes a solace rather than a catalyst for learning.
Questioner: I am simply trying to trace the evolution of this catalyst that
then, as you say, changes in fifth density. I might as well complete this and
ask if there is any ingestion of food in sixth density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, the nature of this food is that of
light and is impossible to describe to you in any meaningful way as regards
the thrust of your query.
Questioner: On this planet after the harvest is complete, will fourth-density
beings be incarnate on the surface as we know it now?
Ra: I am Ra. The probability/possibility vortices indicate this to be most
likely.
Questioner: Then will there be at that time any fifth-density or sixth-
density beings on the surface of the planet?
Ra: I am Ra. Not for a fairly long measure of your time as fourth-density
beings need to spend their learn/teaching space/time with their own
density’s entities.
Questioner: Then basically what you are saying is that at that point the
teachings of fifth or sixth-density beings would not be too well understood
by the new fourth-density beings?
Ra: I am Ra. Do you wish to query us upon this point?
Questioner: I guess I didn’t state that correctly. Would the new fourth-
density beings then need to evolve in their thinking to reach a point where
fifth-density lessons would be of value?
Ra: I am Ra. We grasp the thrust of your query. Although it is true that as
fourth-density beings progress they have more and more need for other
density teachings, it is also true that just as we speak to you due to the
calling, so the information called is always available. It is simply that fifth-
density beings will not live upon the surface of the planetary sphere until
the planet reaches fifth-density vibratory level.
Questioner: I was wondering, then, if the mechanism of teach/learning was
the same relatively then in fourth density. From what you say, it is necessary
first for a call to exist for the teach/learning of fifth density to be given to
fourth just as a call must exist here before fourth-density lessons are given to
third density. Is this correct?
                                       98
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

Ra: I am Ra. This query is misguided, for experience in fourth density is
emphatically not the same as third-density experience. However, it is correct
that the same mechanism of calling predisposes the information received in
a way consonant with free will.
You may ask one more full question at this working.
Questioner: You stated that the key to strengthening the will is
concentration. Can you tell me the relative importance of the following aids
to concentration? I have listed: silence, temperature control, comfort of
body, screening as a Faraday cage would screen electromagnetic radiation,
visible light screening, and a constant smell such as the use of incense. In
other words, an isolation-type of situation. You mentioned that this was one
of the functions of the pyramid.
Ra: I am Ra. The analogies of body complex to mind and spirit complex
activities have been discussed previously. You may consider all of these
aforementioned aids as those helpful to the stimulation of that which in
actuality aids concentration, that being the will of the entity. This free will
may be focused at any object or goal.
Questioner: I was really trying to get at whether it would be of great
importance to construct a better place for our meditations. We have
distractions here of the types which I mentioned, and I know that it is a
function of our total free will as to whether we construct this or not, but I
was trying to get at the principles behind and the relative importance of the
Faraday cage. It would be quite a construction and I was wondering if it
would be of any real value?
Ra: I am Ra. Without infringing upon free will we feel it possible to state
that the Faraday cage and the isolation tank are gadgets.
The surrounding of self in a sylvan atmosphere, apart from distractions, in a
place of working used for no other purpose, in which you and your
associates agree to lay aside all goals but that of the meditative seeking of the
infinite Creator is, shall we say, not gadgetry but the making use of the
creation of the Father in second-density love, and in the love and support of
otherselves. Are there any brief queries before this working is at an end?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. I leave you in the love and the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.


                                       99
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 43

Session #44, March 28, 1981, and Session #45, April 6, 1981, contain only
personal material and were, for that reason, removed from The Law of One,
Book II.




                                    100
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 46
                               April 15, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: If an entity polarizes toward the service-to-self path, would
anger have the same physical effect that it would have on the entity
polarizing on the service-to-others path? Would it also cause cancer, or is it
just a catalytic effect working in the positively polarizing entity?
Ra: I am Ra. The catalytic mechanisms are dependent, not upon the chosen
polarity of a mind/body/spirit complex, but upon the use or purpose to
which this catalyst is put. Thus the entity which uses the experience of
anger to polarize consciously positively or negatively does not experience the
bodily catalyst but rather uses the catalyst in mental configuration.
Questioner: I am not sure that I understand that. Let’s take some examples:
an entity polarizing toward the negative path becomes angry. Let’s take the
condition where he develops a cancer. What is the principle that is at work
for him?
Ra: I am Ra. We see the thrust of your query and will respond at variance
with the specific query if that meets with your approval.
Questioner: Certainly.
Ra: The entity polarizing positively perceives the anger. This entity, if using
this catalyst mentally, blesses and loves this anger in itself. It then intensifies
this anger consciously in mind alone until the folly of this red-ray energy is
perceived not as folly in itself but as energy subject to spiritual entropy due
to the randomness of energy being used.
Positive orientation then provides the will and faith to continue this
mentally intense experience of letting the anger be understood, accepted,
and integrated with the mind/body/spirit complex. The other-self which is
the object of anger is thus transformed into an object of acceptance,
understanding, and accommodation, all being reintegrated using the great
energy which anger began.
The negatively oriented mind/body/spirit complex will use this anger in a
similarly conscious fashion, refusing to accept the undirected or random
energy of anger and instead, through will and faith, funneling this energy
into a practical means of venting the negative aspect of this emotion so as to


                                        101
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 46

obtain control over other-self, or otherwise control the situation causing
anger.
Control is the key to negatively polarized use of catalyst. Acceptance is the
key to positively polarized use of catalyst. Between these polarities lies the
potential for this random and undirected energy creating a bodily complex
analog of what you call the cancerous growth of tissue.
Questioner: Then as I understand it you are saying that if the positively
polarizing entity fails to accept the other-self or if the negatively polarizing
entity fails to control the other-self, either of these conditions will cause
cancer, possibly. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The first acceptance, or control
depending upon polarity, is of the self. Anger is one of many things to be
accepted and loved as a part of self or controlled as a part of self, if the
entity is to do work.
Questioner: Then are you saying that if a negatively polarizing entity is
unable to control his own anger or unable to control himself in anger that
he may cause cancer? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct. The negative polarization contains a great
requirement for control and repression.
Questioner: A repression of what?
Ra: I am Ra. Any mind complex distortion which you may call emotional
which is of itself disorganized, needs, in order to be useful to the negatively
oriented entity, to be repressed and then brought to the surface in an
organized use. Thus you may find for instance, negatively polarized entities
controlling and repressing such basic bodily complex needs as the sexual
desire in order that in the practice thereof the will may be used to enforce
itself upon the other-self with greater efficiency when the sexual behavior is
allowed.
Questioner: Then the positively oriented entity, rather than attempting
repression of emotion, would balance the emotion as stated in an earlier
contact. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and illustrates the path of unity.
Questioner: Then cancer is a training catalyst operating for both polarities
in approximately the same way but creating or attempting to create
polarization in both directions, positive and negative, depending upon the
orientation of the entity experiencing the catalyst. Is this correct?


                                       102
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 46

Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect in that catalyst is unconscious and does not
work with intelligence but rather is part of the, shall we say, mechanism of
learn/teaching set up by the sub-Logos before the beginning of your
space/time.
Questioner: How does cancer do this learn/teaching when the entity
developing cancer has no conscious idea of what is happening to him when
he develops cancer?
Ra: I am Ra. In many cases catalyst is not used.
Questioner: What is the plan for use of the catalyst of cancer?
Ra: I am Ra. The catalyst, and all catalyst, is designed to offer experience.
This experience in your density may be loved and accepted or it may be
controlled. These are the two paths. When neither path is chosen the
catalyst fails in its design and the entity proceeds until catalyst strikes it
which causes it to form a bias towards acceptance and love or separation and
control. There is no lack of space/time in which this catalyst may work.
Questioner: I am assuming that the plan of the Logos is for positively and
negatively polarized social memory complexes in fourth density and above.
Can you tell me the purpose of the plan for these two types of social
memory complexes with respect to Coulomb’s Law or negative and positive
electrical polarity, or in any way that you can?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument grows weary. We shall speak with you again.
We may indicate the possibility, without further harm to this instrument, of
approximately two sessions per your weekly period until these weeks of
potential for attack and presence of very low physical energy are passed.
May we say it is good to be with this group. We appreciate your fidelity.
Are there any brief queries before the end of this work time?
Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Each is supporting the instrument well and the instrument
remains steady in its purpose. You are conscientious. All is well. We ward
you ware of any laxity regarding the arrangement and orientation of
appurtenances.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     103
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 47
                              April 18, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first give us an indication of the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: The question that I was trying to ask at the end of the last
session was: Of what value to evolution or experience with respect to the
Creator knowing Itself are the positive and negative social memory
complexes that form starting in fourth density, and why was this planned by
the Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. There are inherent incorrectness in your query. However, we
may answer the main point of it.
The incorrectness lies in the consideration that social memory complexes
were planned by the Logos or sub-Logos. This is incorrect, as the unity of
the Creator exists within the smallest portion of any material created by
Love, much less in a self-aware being.
However, the distortion of free will causes the social memory complex to
appear as a possibility at a certain stage of evolution of mind. The purpose,
or consideration which causes entities to form such complexes, of these
social memory complexes, is a very simple extension of the basic distortion
towards the Creator’s knowing of Itself, for when a group of
mind/body/spirits becomes able to form a social memory complex, all
experience of each entity is available to the whole of the complex. Thus the
Creator knows more of Its creation in each entity partaking of this
communion of entities.
Questioner: You gave the values of better than 50% service-to-others for
fourth-density positive and better than 95% service-to-self for fourth-density
negative social memory complexes. Do these two values correspond to the
same rate, shall I say, of vibration?
Ra: I am Ra. I perceive you have difficulty in expressing your query. We
shall respond in an attempt to clarify your query.
The vibratory rates are not to be understood as the same in positive and
negative orientations. They are to be understood as having the power to
accept and work with intelligent infinity to a certain degree or intensity.
                                      104
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 47

Due to the fact that the primary color, shall we say, or energy blue is
missing from the negatively oriented system of power, the green/blue
vibratory energies are not seen in the vibratory schedules or patterns of
negative fourth and fifth rates of vibration.
The positive on the other hand, shall we say, has the full spectrum of true
color time/space vibratory patterns and thus contains a variant vibratory
pattern or schedule. Each is capable of doing fourth-density work. This is
the criterion for harvest.
Questioner: Did you say that blue was missing from fourth-density
negative?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us clarify further. As we have previously stated, all beings
have the potential for all possible vibratory rates. Thus the potential of the
green and blue energy center activation is, of course, precisely where it must
be in a creation of Love. However, the negatively polarized entity will have
achieved harvest due to extremely efficient use of red and yellow/orange,
moving directly to the gateway indigo bringing through this intelligent
energy channel the in-streamings of intelligent infinity.
Questioner: Then at fourth-density graduation into fifth is there anything
like that which you gave as the percentages necessary for third-density
graduation into fourth in polarization?
Ra: I am Ra. There are, in your modes of thinking, responses we can make,
which we shall make. However, the important point is that the graduations
from density to density do occur. The positive/negative polarity is a thing
which will, at the sixth level, simply become history. Therefore, we speak in
an illusory time continuum when we discuss statistics of positive versus
negative harvest into fifth. A large percentage of fourth-density negative
entities continue the negative path from fourth to fifth-density experience,
for without wisdom the compassion and desire to aid other-self is not
extremely well informed. Thus though one loses approximately two percent
moving from negative to positive during the fourth-density experience we
find approximately eight percent of graduations into fifth density those of
the negative.
Questioner: What I was actually asking was if 50% is required for
graduation from third to fourth in the positive sense and 95% was required
for graduation in the negative sense, does this have to more closely approach
100% for graduation in both cases for graduation from fourth to fifth
density? Does an entity have to be 99% polarized for negative and maybe
80% polarized positive for graduation?
Ra: I am Ra. We perceive the query now.
                                     105
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 47

To give this in your terms is misleading for there are, shall we say, visual
aids or training aids available in fourth density which automatically aid the
entity in polarization while cutting down extremely upon the quick effect of
catalyst. Thus the density above yours must take up more space/time.
The percentage of service-to-others of positively oriented entities will
harmoniously approach 98% in intention. The qualifications for fifth
density, however, involve understanding. This then, becomes the primary
qualification for graduation from fourth to fifth density. To achieve this
graduation the entity must be able to understand the actions, the
movements, and the dance. There is no percentage describable which
measures this understanding. It is a measure of efficiency of perception. It
may be measured by light. The ability to love, accept, and use a certain
intensity of light thus creates the requirement for both positive and negative
fourth to fifth harvesting.
Questioner: Can you define what you mean by a “crystallized entity”?
Ra: I am Ra. We have used this particular term because it has a fairly precise
meaning in your language. When a crystalline structure is formed of your
physical material the elements present in each molecule are bonded in a
regularized fashion with elements in each other molecule. Thus the
structure is regular and, when fully and perfectly crystallized, has certain
properties. It will not splinter or break; it is very strong without effort; and
it is radiant, traducing light into a beautiful refraction giving pleasure of the
eye to many.
Questioner: In our esoteric literature numerous bodies are listed. I have
listed here the physical body, the etheric, the emotional, the astral. Can you
tell me if this listing is the proper number, and can you tell me the uses and
purposes and effects etc. of each of these and any other bodies that may be
in our mind/body/spirit complex?
Ra: I am Ra. To answer your query fully would be the work of many
sessions such as this one, for the interrelationships of the various bodies and
each body’s effects in various situations is an enormous study. However, we
shall begin by referring your minds back to the spectrum of true colors and
the usage of this understanding in grasping the various densities of your
octave.
We have the number seven repeated from the macrocosm to the microcosm
in structure and experience. Therefore, it would only be expected that there
would be seven basic bodies which we would perhaps be most lucid by
stating as red-ray body, etc. However, we are aware that you wish to
correspond these bodies mentioned with the color rays. This will be

                                      106
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 47

confusing, for various teachers have offered their teach/learning
understanding in various terms. Thus one may name a subtle body one
thing and another find a different name.
The red-ray body is your chemical body. However, it is not the body which
you have as clothing in the physical. It is the unconstructed material of the
body, the elemental body without form. This basic unformed material body
is important to understand for there are healings which may be carried out
by the simple understanding of the elements present in the physical vehicle.
The orange-ray body is the physical body complex. This body complex is
still not the body you inhabit but rather the body formed without self-
awareness, the body in the womb before the spirit/mind complex enters.
This body may live without the inhabitation of the mind and spirit
complexes. However, it seldom does so.
The yellow-ray body is your physical vehicle which you know of at this time
and in which you experience catalyst. This body has the mind/body/spirit
characteristics and is equal to the physical illusion, as you have called it.
The green-ray body is that body which may be seen in séance when what
you call ectoplasm is furnished. This is a lighter body packed more densely
with life. You may call this the astral body following some other teachings.
Others have called this same body the etheric body. However, this is not
correct in the sense that the etheric body is that body of gateway wherein
intelligent energy is able to mold the mind/body/spirit complex.
The light body or blue-ray body may be called the devachanic body. There
are many other names for this body especially in your so-called Indian
Sutras or writings, for there are those among these peoples which have
explored these regions and understand the various types of devachanic
bodies. There are many, many types of bodies in each density, much like
your own.
The indigo-ray body which we choose to call the etheric body is, as we have
said, the gateway body. In this body form is substance and you may only see
this body as that of light as it may mold itself as it desires.
The violet-ray body may perhaps be understood as what you might call the
Buddha body or that body which is complete.
Each of these bodies has an effect upon your mind/body/spirit complex in
your life being-ness. The interrelationships, as we have said, are many and
complex
Perhaps one suggestion that may be indicated is this: The indigo-ray body
may be used by the healer once the healer becomes able to place its
                                     107
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 47

consciousness in this etheric state. The violet-ray or Buddhic body is of
equal efficacy to the healer for within it lies a sense of wholeness which is
extremely close to unity with all that there is. These bodies are part of each
entity and the proper use of them and understanding of them is, though far
advanced from the standpoint of third-density harvest, nevertheless useful
to the adept.
Questioner: Which bodies do we have immediately after physical death
from this yellow-ray body that I now am in?
Ra: I am Ra. You have all bodies in potentiation.
Questioner: Then the yellow-ray body in potentiation is used to create this
chemical arrangement that I have as a physical body now. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect only in that in your present incarnation the
yellow-ray body is not in potentiation but in activation, it being that body
which is manifest.
Questioner: Then after death from this incarnation we still have the yellow-
ray body in potentiation, but then in the general case of our planetary
population after death, would they then normally have the green-ray body
manifested?
Ra: I am Ra. Not immediately. The first body which activates itself upon
death is the “form-maker” or the indigo-ray body. This body remains—you
have called it the “ka”—until etherea has been penetrated and
understanding has been gained by the mind/body/spirit totality. Once this
is achieved, if the proper body to be activated is green-ray, then this will
occur.
Questioner: Let me make a statement and you tell me if I am correct. After
death then, if an entity is unaware, he may become what is called an Earth-
bound spirit until he is able to achieve the required awareness for activation
of one of his bodies. Would it be possible then to activate any of the bodies
from red through violet?
Ra: I am Ra. Given the proper stimulus, this is correct.
Questioner: What stimulus would create what we call an Earth-bound spirit
or a lingering ghost?
Ra: I am Ra. The stimulus for this is the faculty of the will. If the will of
yellow-ray mind/body/spirit is that which is stronger than the progressive
impetus of the physical death towards realization of that which comes, that
is, if the will is concentrated enough upon the previous experience, the
entity’s shell of yellow-ray, though no longer activated, cannot either be

                                     108
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 47

completely deactivated and, until the will is released, the mind/body/spirit
complex is caught. This often occurs, as we see you are aware, in the case of
sudden death as well as in the case of extreme concern for a thing or an
other-self.
Questioner: Well then, does orange-ray activation after death occur very
frequently with this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. Quite infrequently, due to the fact that this particular
manifestation is without will. Occasionally an other-self will so demand the
form of the one passing through the physical death that some semblance of
the being will remain. This is orange-ray. This is rare, for normally if one
entity desires another enough to call it, the entity will have the
corresponding desire to be called. Thus the manifestation would be the shell
of yellow-ray.
Questioner: What does the large percentage of the Earth’s population, as
they pass through the physical, activate?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
The normal procedure, given an harmonious passage from yellow-ray bodily
manifestation, is for the mind and spirit complex to rest in the etheric or
indigo body until such time as the entity begins its preparation for
experience in an incarnated place which has a manifestation formed by the
etheric energy molding it into activation and manifestation. This indigo
body, being intelligent energy, is able to offer the newly dead, as you would
term it, soul a perspective and a place from which to view the experience
most recently manifested. Is there a short query we may answer at this time?
Questioner: I will only ask if there is anything that we may do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The appurtenances are conscientiously measured by eye and
spirit. You are conscientious. All is well. Observe this instrument to ensure
continued building of the vital energies. It will have to work upon its own
physical energies for this weakness was brought about by free will of the self.
I am Ra. We leave you now in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     109
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 48
                             April 22, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you tell us of the instrument’s condition and if she is
improving with time?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energies are improving with time, as
you measure it. This instrument’s physical energies are less than your
previous asking.
Questioner: Thank you. If you, Ra, as an individualized entity were
incarnate on Earth now with full awareness and memory of what you know
now, what would be your objective at this time on Earth as far as activities
are concerned?
Ra: I am Ra. The query suggests that which has been learned to be
impractical. However, were we to again be naive enough to think that our
physical presence was any more effective than that love/light we send your
peoples and the treasure of this contact, we would do as we did do. We
would be, and we would offer our selves as teach/learners.
Questioner: My lecture yesterday was attended by only a few. If this had
occurred during a UFO flap many more would have attended. Since Orion
entities cause the flaps, what is Orion’s reward for visibility in that they
actually create greater opportunities for the dissemination of information
such as this information at those times?
Ra: I am Ra. This assumption is incorrect. The flaps cause many fears
among your peoples, many speakings, understandings concerning plots,
cover-ups, mutilations, killings, and other negative impressions. Even those
supposedly positive reports which gain public awareness speak of doom.
You may understand yourself as one who will be in the minority due to the
understandings which you wish to share, if we may use that misnomer.
We perceive there is a further point we may posit at this time. The audience
brought about by Orion-type publicity is not seeded by seniority of
vibration to a great extent. The audiences receiving teach/learnings without
stimulus from publicity will be more greatly oriented towards illumination.
Therefore, forget you the counting.




                                      110
                 The Law of One, Book II, Session 48

Questioner: Thank you. That clears up that point very well. Can you tell
me how positive and negative polarizations in fourth and fifth density are
used to cause working in consciousness?
Ra: I am Ra. There is very little work in consciousness in fourth and in fifth
densities compared to the work done in third density. The work that is
accomplished in positive fourth is that work whereby the positive social
memory complex, having, through slow stages, harmoniously integrated
itself, goes forth to aid those of less positive orientation which seek their aid.
Thus their service is their work and through this dynamic between the
societal self and the other-self, which is the object of love, greater and
greater intensities of understanding or compassion are attained. This
intensity continues until the appropriate intensity of the light may be
welcomed. This is fourth-density harvest.
Within fourth-density positive there are minor amounts of catalyst of a
spiritual and mental complex distortion. This occurs during the process of
harmonizing to the extent of forming the social memory complex. This
causes some small catalyst and work to occur, but the great work of fourth
density lies in the contact betwixt the societal self and less polarized other-
self.
In fourth-density negative much work is accomplished during the fighting
for position which precedes the period of the social memory complex.
There are opportunities to polarize negatively by control of other-selves.
During the social memory complex period of fourth-density negative the
situation is the same. The work takes place through the societal reaching
out to less polarized otherself in order to aid in negative polarization.
In fifth-density positive and negative the concept of work done through a
potential difference is not particularly helpful as fifth-density entities are,
again, intensifying rather than potentiating.
In positive, the fifth-density complex uses sixth-density teach/learners to
study the more illuminated understandings of unity thus becoming more
and more wise. Fifth-density positive social memory complexes will choose
to divide their service to others in two ways: first, the beaming of light to
creation; second, the sending of groups to be of aid as instruments of light
such as those whom you are familiar with through channels.
In fifth-density negative, service to self has become extremely intense and
the self has shrunk or compacted so that the dialogues with the
teach/learners are used exclusively in order to intensify wisdom. There are
very, very few fifth-density negative Wanderers for they fear the forgetting.


                                       111
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 48

There are very, very few fifth-density Orion members for they do not any
longer perceive any virtue in other-selves.
Questioner: Thank you. I would like to take as an example an entity,
starting before birth, who is roughly high on the seniority list for positive
polarization and possible harvestability at the end of this cycle and follow a
full cycle of his experience starting before his incarnation—which body is
activated, the process of becoming incarnate, the activation of the third-
density physical body, the process as the body moves through this density
and is acted upon by catalysts, the process of death, and the activation of
the various bodies so that we make a full circuit from a point prior to
incarnation back around through incarnation and death; you might say one
cycle of incarnation in this density. Could you do that for me?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is most distorted for it assumes that creations are
alike. Each mind/body/spirit complex has its own patterns of activation and
its own rhythms of awakening. The important thing for harvest is the
harmonious balance between the various energy centers of the
mind/body/spirit complex. This is to be noted as of relative import. We
grasp the thrust of your query and will make a most general answer stressing
the unimportance of such arbitrary generalizations.
The entity, before incarnation, dwells in the appropriate, shall we say, place
in time/space. The true color type of this location will be dependent upon
the entity’s needs. Those entities for instance which, being Wanderers, have
the green, blue, or indigo true color core of mind/body/spirit complex will
have rested therein.
Entrance into incarnation requires the investment or activation of the
indigo-ray or etheric body for this is the “formmaker.” The young or small
physical mind/body/spirit complex has the seven energy centers potentiated
before the birthing process. There are also analogs in time/space of these
energy centers corresponding to the seven energy centers in each of the
seven true color densities. Thus in the microcosm exists all the experience
that is prepared. It is as though the infant contains the universe.
The patterns of activation of an entity of high seniority will undoubtedly
move with some rapidity to the green-ray level which is the springboard to
primary blue. There is always some difficulty in penetrating blue primary
energy for it requires that which your people have in great paucity; that is,
honesty. Blue ray is the ray of free communication with self and with
otherself. Having accepted that an harvestable or nearly harvestable entity
will be working from this green-ray springboard one may then posit that the
experiences in the remainder of the incarnation will be focused upon
activation of the primary blue-ray of freely given communication, of indigo
                                     112
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 48

ray, that of freely shared intelligent energy, and if possible, moving through
this gateway, the penetration of violet-ray intelligent infinity. This may be
seen to be manifested by a sense of the consecrate or hallowed nature of
everyday creations and activities.
Upon the bodily complex death, as you call this transition, the entity will
immediately, upon realization of its state, return to the indigo form-maker
body and rest therein until the proper future placement is made.
Here we have the anomaly of harvest. In harvest the entity will then transfer
its indigo body into violet-ray manifestation as seen in true color yellow.
This is for the purpose of gauging the harvestability of the entity. After this
anomalous activity has been carefully completed, the entity will move into
indigo body again and be placed in the correct true color locus in
space/time and time/space at which time the healings and learn/teachings
necessary shall be completed and further incarnation needs determined.
Questioner: Who supervises the determination of further incarnation needs
and sets up the seniority list for incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a query with two answers.
Firstly, there are those directly under the Guardians who are responsible for
the incarnation patterns of those incarnating automatically, that is, without
conscious self-awareness of the process of spiritual evolution. You may call
these beings angelic if you prefer. They are, shall we say, “local” or of your
planetary sphere.
The seniority of vibration is to be likened unto placing various grades of
liquids in the same glass. Some will rise to the top; others will sink to the
bottom. Layers and layers of entities will ensue. As harvest draws near, those
filled with the most light and love will naturally, and without supervision,
be in line, shall we say, for the experience of incarnation.
When the entity becomes aware in its mind/body/spirit complex totality of
the mechanism for spiritual evolution it, itself, will arrange and place those
lessons and entities necessary for maximum growth and expression of
polarity in the incarnative experience before the forgetting process occurs.
The only disadvantage of this total free will of those senior entities choosing
the manner of incarnation experiences is that some entities attempt to learn
so much during one incarnative experience that the intensity of catalyst
disarranges the polarized entity and the experience thus is not maximally
useful as intended.




                                      113
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 48

Questioner: An analogy to that would be a student in college signing up for
more courses than he could possibly assimilate in the time they were given.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Could you tell me how the various bodies, red through violet,
are linked to the energy centers, red through violet? Are they linked in some
way?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
As we have noted, each of the true color densities has the seven energy
centers and each entity contains all this in potentiation. The activation,
while in yellow-ray, of violet-ray intelligent infinity is a passport to the next
octave of experience. There are adepts who have penetrated many, many of
the energy centers and several of the true colors. This must be done with
utmost care while in the physical body for as we noted when speaking of the
dangers of linking red/orange/yellow circuitry with true color blue circuitry
the potential for disarrangement of the mind/body/spirit complex is great.
However, the entity who penetrates intelligent infinity is basically capable
of walking the universe with unfettered tread.
Is there any brief query before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Just if there is anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. As we have said, this instrument is weak physically
and continued work times will lengthen this weakness. The continued
contact also aids in the continued climb in vital energy of the instrument as
well as the integration and vital energy of the group as an unit. The choice
is yours. We are pleased. All is well. You are conscientious. Continue so.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, then, my friends, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                       114
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 49
                              April 27, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you please give us a reading on the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: I was wondering; in a previous session you had mentioned the
left and right ear tones, the left and the right brain somehow being related
to the polarities of service-to-self and service-to-others. Could you comment
on this?
Ra: I am Ra. We may comment on this.
Questioner: Will you go ahead and comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. The lobes of your physical complex brain are alike in their use
of weak electrical energy. The entity ruled by intuition and impulse is equal
to the entity governed by rational analysis when polarity is considered. The
lobes may both be used for service to self or service-to-others. It may seem
that the rational or analytical mind might have more of a possibility of
successfully pursuing the negative orientation due to the fact that in our
understanding too much order is by its essence negative. However, this
same ability to structure abstract concepts and to analyze experiential data
may be the key to rapid positive polarization. It may be said that those
whose analytical capacities are predominant have somewhat more to work
with in polarizing.
The function of intuition is to inform intelligence. In your illusion the
unbridled predominance of intuition will tend to keep an entity from the
greater polarizations due to the vagaries of intuitive perception. As you may
see, these two types of brain structure need to be balanced in order that the
net sum of experiential catalyst will be polarization and illumination, for
without the acceptance by the rational mind of the worth of the intuitive
faculty the creative aspects which aid in illumination will be stifled.
There is one correspondence between right and left and positive and
negative. The web of energy which surrounds your bodies contains
somewhat complex polarizations. The left area of the head and upper
shoulder is most generally seen to be of a negative polarization whereas the


                                       115
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 49

right is of positive polarization, magnetically speaking. This is the cause of
the tone’s meaning for you.
Questioner: Will you expand on the positive and negative polarizations in
general and how they apply to individuals and planets, etc.? I think there is
a correlation here, but I’m not sure.
Ra: I am Ra. It is correct that there is a correlation between the energy field
of an entity of your nature and planetary bodies, for all material is
constructed by means of the dynamic tension of the magnetic field. The
lines of force in both cases may be seen to be much like the interweaving
spirals of the braided hair. Thus positive and negative wind and interweave
forming geometric relationships in the energy fields of both persons, as you
would call a mind/body/spirit complex, and planets.
The negative pole is the south pole or the lower pole. The north or upper
pole is positive. The crisscrossing of these spiraling energies form primary,
secondary, and tertiary energy centers. You are familiar with the primary
energy centers of the physical, mental, and spiritual body complex.
Secondary points of the crisscrossing of positive and negative center
orientation revolve about several of your centers. The yellow-ray center may
be seen to have secondary energy centers in elbow, in knee, and in the
subtle bodies at a slight spacing from the physical vehicle at points
describing diamonds about the entity’s navel area surrounding the body.
One may examine each of the energy centers for such secondary centers.
Some of your peoples work with these energy centers, and you call this
acupuncture. However, it is to be noted that there are most often anomalies
in the placement of the energy centers so that the scientific precision of this
practice is brought into question. Like most scientific attempts at precision,
it fails to take into account the unique qualities of each creation.
The most important concept to grasp about the energy field is that the
lower or negative pole will draw the universal energy into itself from the
cosmos. Therefrom it will move upward to be met and reacted to by the
positive spiraling energy moving downward from within. The measure of an
entity’s level of ray activity is the locus wherein the south pole outer energy
has been met by the inner spiraling positive energy.
As an entity grows more polarized this locus will move upwards. This
phenomenon has been called by your peoples the kundalini. However, it
may better be thought of as the meeting place of cosmic and inner, shall we
say, vibratory understanding. To attempt to raise the locus of this meeting
without realizing the metaphysical principles of magnetism upon which this
depends is to invite great imbalance.

                                      116
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 49

Questioner: What process would be the recommended process for correctly
awakening the kundalini and of what value would that be?
Ra: I am Ra. The metaphor of the coiled serpent being called upwards is
vastly appropriate for consideration by your peoples. This is what you are
attempting when you seek. There are, as we have stated, great
misapprehensions concerning this metaphor and the nature of pursuing its
goal. We must generalize and ask that you grasp the fact that this in effect
renders far less useful that which we share. However, as each entity is
unique, generalities are our lot when communicating for your possible
edification.
We have two types of energy. We are attempting then, as entities in any
true color of this octave, to move the meeting place of inner and outer
natures further and further along or upward along the energy centers. The
two methods of approaching this with sensible method are first, the seating
within one’s self of those experiences which are attracted to the entity
through the south pole. Each experience will need to be observed,
experienced, balanced, accepted, and seated within the individual. As the
entity grows in self-acceptance and awareness of catalyst the location of the
comfortable seating of these experiences will rise to the new true color
entity. The experience, whatever it may be, will be seated in red ray and
considered as to its survival content and so forth.
Each experience will be sequentially understood by the growing and seeking
mind/body/spirit complex in terms of survival, then in terms of personal
identity, then in terms of social relations, then in terms of universal love,
then in terms of how the experience may beget free communication, then in
terms of how the experience may be linked to universal energies, and finally
in terms of the sacramental nature of each experience.
Meanwhile the Creator lies within. In the north pole the crown is already
upon the head and the entity is potentially a god. This energy is brought
into being by the humble and trusting acceptance of this energy through
meditation and contemplation of the self and of the Creator.
Where these energies meet is where the serpent will have achieved its height.
When this uncoiled energy approaches universal love and radiant being the
entity is in a state whereby the harvestability of the entity comes nigh.
Questioner: Will you recommend a technique of meditation?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Is it better, or shall I say, does it produce more useable results
in meditation to leave the mind as blank as possible and let it run down, so

                                      117
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 49

to speak, or is it better to focus in meditation on some object or some thing
for concentration?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this work time.
Each of the two types of meditation is useful for a particular reason. The
passive meditation involving the clearing of the mind, the emptying of the
mental jumble which is characteristic of mind complex activity among your
peoples, is efficacious for those whose goal is to achieve an inner silence as a
base from which to listen to the Creator. This is an useful and helpful tool
and is by far the most generally useful type of meditation as opposed to
contemplation or prayer.
The type of meditation which may be called visualization has as its goal not
that which is contained in the meditation itself. Visualization is the tool of
the adept. Those who learn to hold visual images in mind are developing an
inner concentrative power that can transcend boredom and discomfort.
When this ability has become crystallized in an adept the adept may then do
polarizing in consciousness without external action which can effect the
planetary consciousness. This is the reason for the existence of the so-called
White Magician. Only those wishing to pursue the conscious raising of
planetary vibration will find visualization to be a particularly satisfying type
of meditation.
Contemplation or the consideration in a meditative state of an inspiring
image or text is extremely useful also among your peoples, and the faculty of
will called praying is also of a potentially helpful nature. Whether it is
indeed an helpful activity depends quite totally upon the intentions and
objects of the one who prays.
May we ask if there are any brief queries at this time?
Questioner: I will just ask if there is anything that we may do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact and if the two
periods per week are still appropriate?
Ra: I am Ra. We request your care in the placement of the neck support for
this entity as it is too often careless. You are conscientious and your
alignments are well. The timing, if we may use that expression, of the
sessions is basically correct. However, you are to be commended for
observing fatigue in the circle and refraining from a working until all were
in love, harmony, and vital energy as one being. This is, and will continue
to be, most helpful.




                                      118
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 49

I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      119
            The Law of One, Book II, Session 50
                                May 6, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you please give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition now?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: In the last session you made the statement that experiences are
attracted into the entity through the south pole. Could you expand on that
and give us a definition of what you mean?
Ra: I am Ra. It takes some consideration to accomplish the proper
perspective for grasping the sense of the above information. The south or
negative pole is one which attracts. It pulls unto itself those things
magnetized to it. So with the mind/body/spirit complex. The in-flow of
experience is of the south pole influx. You may consider this a simplistic
statement.
The only specific part of this correctness is that the red-ray or foundation
energy center, being the lowest or root energy center of the physical vehicle,
will have the first opportunity to react to any experience. In this way only,
you may see a physical locus of the south pole being identified with the root
energy center. In every facet of mind and body the root or foundation will
be given the opportunity to function first.
What is this opportunity but survival? This is the root possibility of
response and may be found to be characteristic of the basic functions of
both mind and body. You will find this instinct the strongest, and once this
is balanced much is open to the seeker. The south pole then ceases blocking
the experiential data and higher energy centers of mind and body become
availed of the opportunity to use the experience drawn to it.
Questioner: Why do you say the experience is drawn to or attracted to the
entity?
Ra: I am Ra. We say this due to our understanding that this is the nature of
the phenomenon of experiential catalyst and its entry into the
mind/body/spirit complex’s awareness.
Questioner: Could you give an example of how an entity sets up a
condition for attracting a particular experiential catalyst and how that
catalyst then is provided or is learned.
                                      120
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 50

Ra: I am Ra. Such an example may be given.
Questioner: Will you give that?
Ra: I am Ra. We paused to scan (name’s) consciousness to use its
experiential catalyst as example. We may proceed.
This is one instance and extrapolation may be made to other entities which
are aware of the process of evolution. This entity chose, before incarnation,
the means whereby catalyst had great probability of being obtained. This
entity desired the process of expressing love and light without expecting any
return. This entity programmed also to endeavor to accomplish spiritual
work and to comfort itself with companionship in the doing of this work.
Agreements were made prior to incarnation; the first, with the so-called
parents and siblings of this entity. This provided the experiential catalyst for
the situation of offering radiance of being without expectation of return.
The second program involved agreements with several entities. These
agreements provided and will provide, in your time/space and space/time
continuum, opportunities for the experiential catalyst of work and
comradeship.
There are events which were part of a program for this entity only in that
they were possibility/probability vortices having to do with your societal
culture. These events include the nature of the living or standard of living,
the type of relationships entered into in your legal framework, and the social
climate during the incarnation. The incarnation was understood to be one
which would take place at harvest.
These givens, shall we say, apply to millions of your peoples. Those aware of
evolution and desirous in the very extreme of attaining the heart of love and
the radiance which gives understanding no matter what the lessons
programmed: they have to do with other-selves, not with events: they have
to do with giving, not receiving, for the lessons of love are of this nature
both for positive and negative. Those negatively harvestable will be found at
this time endeavoring to share their love of self.
There are those whose lessons are more random due to their present
inability to comprehend the nature and mechanism of the evolution of
mind, body, and spirit. Of these we may say that the process is guarded by
those who never cease their watchful expectation of being of service. There
is no entity without help, either through self-awareness of the unity of
creation or through guardians of the self which protect the less sophisticated
mind/body/spirit from any permanent separation from unity while the
lessons of your density continue.

                                      121
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 50

Questioner: Could you give an example of negative polarization sharing
love of self? It would seem to me that that would deplete negative
polarization. Could you expand on the concept?
Ra: I am Ra. We may not use examples of known beings due to the
infringement this would cause. Thus we must be general.
The negatively oriented being will be one who feels that it has found power
that gives meaning to its existence precisely as the positive polarization does
feel. This negative entity will strive to offer these understandings to other-
selves, most usually by the process of forming the elite, the disciples, and
teaching the need and rightness of the enslavement of other-selves for their
own good. These other-selves are conceived to be dependent upon the self
and in need of the guidance and the wisdom of the self.
Questioner: Thank you. How does the ability to hold visual images in
mind allow the adept to do polarization in consciousness without external
action?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a simple query, for the adept is one which will go
beyond the green-ray which signals entry into harvestability. The adept will
not simply be tapping into intelligent energy as a means of readiness for
harvest but tapping into both intelligent energy and intelligent infinity for
the purpose of transmuting planetary harvestability and consciousness.
The means of this working lie within. The key is first, silence, and secondly,
singleness of thought. Thusly a visualization which can be held steady to the
inward eye for several of your minutes, as you measure time, will signal the
adept’s increase in singleness of thought. This singleness of thought then
can be used by the positive adept to work in group ritual visualizations for
the raising of positive energy, by negative adepts for the increase in personal
power.
Questioner: Can you tell me what the adept, after being able to hold the
image for several minutes, does to affect planetary consciousness or affect
positive polarity?
Ra: I am Ra. When the positive adept touches intelligent infinity from
within, this is the most powerful of connections for it is the connection of
the whole mind/body/spirit complex microcosm with the macrocosm. This
connection enables the, shall we say, green-ray true color in time/space to
manifest in your space/time. In green ray thoughts are beings. In your
illusion this is normally not so.
The adepts then become living channels for love and light and are able to
channel this radiance directly into the planetary web of energy nexi. The

                                      122
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 50

ritual will always end by the grounding of this energy in praise and
thanksgiving and the release of this energy into the planetary whole.
Questioner: Could you give me more information on the energy fields of
the body as related to the right and left brain and if this is somehow related
to the pyramid shape as far as energy focusing goes? I am at a loss as to how
to get into this line of questioning, so I will ask that question.
Ra: I am Ra. We are similarly at a loss at this line of answering. We may say
that the pyramid shape is but one which focuses the in-streamings of energy
for use by entities which may become aware of these in-streamings. We may
say further that the shape of your physical brain is not significant as a shape
for concentrating in-streamings of energy. Please ask more specifically if you
may that which you seek.
Questioner: Each of us feels, in meditation, energy upon the head in
various places. Could you tell me what this is, what it signifies, and what
the various places in which we feel it signify?
Ra: I am Ra. Forgetting the pyramid will be of aid to you in the study of
these experiences. The in-streamings of energy are felt by the energy centers
which need, and are prepared for, activation. Thus those who feel the
stimulation at violet-ray level are getting just that. Those feeling it within
the forehead between the brows are experiencing indigo ray and so forth.
Those experiencing tingling and visual images are having some blockage in
the energy center being activated and thus the electrical body spreads this
energy out and its effect is diffused.
Those not truly sincerely requesting this energy may yet feel it if the entities
are not well-trained in psychic defense. Those not desirous of experiencing
these sensations and activations and changes even upon the subconscious
level will not experience anything due to their abilities at defense and
armoring against change.
Questioner: Is it normal to get two simultaneous stimulations at once?
Ra: I am Ra. The most normal for the adept is the following: the indigo
stimulation activating that great gateway into healing, magical work,
prayerful attention, and the radiance of being; and the stimulation of the
violet ray which is the spiritual giving and taking from and to Creator, from
Creator to Creator.
This is a desirable configuration.
Please ask one more full query at this working.



                                      123
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 50

Questioner: Can you expand on the concept which is that it is necessary for
an entity, during incarnation in the physical as we know it, to become
polarized or interact properly with other entities and why this isn’t possible
in between incarnations when the entity is aware of what he wants to do.
Why must he come into an incarnation and lose conscious memory of what
he wants to do and then act in a way in which he hopes to act?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us give the example of the man who sees all the poker
hands. He then knows the game. It is but child’s play to gamble, for it is no
risk. The other hands are known. The possibilities are known and the hand
will be played correctly but with no interest.
In time/space and in the true color green density, the hands of all are open
to the eye. The thoughts, the feelings, the troubles, all these may be seen.
There is no deception and no desire for deception. Thus much may be
accomplished in harmony but the mind/body/spirit gains little polarity
from this interaction.
Let us re-examine this metaphor and multiply it into the longest poker
game you can imagine, a lifetime. The cards are love, dislike, limitation,
unhappiness, pleasure, etc. They are dealt and re-dealt and re-dealt
continuously. You may, during this incarnation begin—and we stress
begin—to know your own cards. You may begin to find the love within
you. You may begin to balance your pleasure, your limitations, etc.
However, your only indication of other-selves’ cards is to look into the eyes.
You cannot remember your hand, their hands, perhaps even the rules of this
game. This game can only be won by those who lose their cards in the
melting influence of love, can only be won by those who lay their pleasures,
their limitations, their all upon the table face up and say inwardly: “All, all
of you players, each other-self, whatever your hand, I love you.” This is the
game: to know, to accept, to forgive, to balance, and to open the self in
love. This cannot be done without the forgetting, for it would carry no
weight in the life of the mind/body/spirit being-ness totality.
Is there a brief query before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious and your alignments are careful. It
would be well to take care that this instrument’s neck is placed carefully
upon its support.




                                     124
                The Law of One, Book II, Session 50

I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      125
