The Law Of One: Book III
  THE RA MATERIAL
         By Ra,
An Humble Messenger Of
    The Law Of One
Copyright © 1982 by L/L Research which is a subsidiary of the Rock Creek
Research & Development Laboratories, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or used in any
forms or by any means—graphic, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying or information storage and retrieval systems—without written
permission from the copyright holder.
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 90-72156
ISBN: 0-945007-03-5
L/L Research
P.O. Box 5195
Louisville, KY 40255-0195
                     Table of Contents
Foreword                                    4
The Law of One, Book III, Session 51        5
The Law of One, Book III, Session 52       10
The Law of One, Book III, Session 53       16
The Law of One, Book III, Session 54      22
The Law of One, Book III, Session 55      30
The Law of One, Book III, Session 56       36
The Law of One, Book III, Session 57      40
The Law of One, Book III, Session 58      49
The Law of One, Book III, Session 59       55
The Law of One, Book III, Session 60       61
The Law of One, Book III, Session 61      68
The Law of One, Book III, Session 62      74
The Law of One, Book III, Session 63       81
The Law of One, Book III, Session 64      89
The Law of One, Book III, Session 65      96
The Law of One, Book III, Session 66     105
The Law of One, Book III, Session 67     116
The Law of One, Book III, Session 68     126
The Law of One, Book III, Session 69      131
The Law of One, Book III, Session 70     137
The Law of One, Book III, Session 71     144
The Law of One, Book III, Session 72      151
The Law of One, Book III, Session 73     157
The Law of One, Book III, Session 74     165
The Law of One, Book III, Session 75     171




                                iii
                               Foreword
On January 15, 1981, our research group started receiving a communication
from the social memory complex, Ra. From this communication
precipitated the Law of One and some of the distortions of the Law of One.
The pages of this book contain an exact transcript, edited only to remove
some personal material, of the communications received in Sessions 51
through 75 with Ra.
This material presupposes a point of view which we have developed in the
course of many years’ study of the UFO phenomenon. If you are not
familiar with our previous work, a reading of our book, SECRETS OF
THE UFO, might prove helpful in understanding the present material.
Also, as you can see from this book’s title, there are 50 previous sessions
with Ra which were collected in THE LAW OF ONE and Book II of THE
LAW OF ONE. If at all possible, it is good to begin with the beginning
with this material, as concepts build upon previous concepts. The Ra
contact continued for 106 session which were printed into four books in
THE LAW OF ONE series. They are available at your local bookstore or
from us. If you wish to receive our quarterly newsletter, in which the best of
our current channeling is published, please request that you be put on our
mailing list.
Book III of THE LAW OF ONE is an intensive study of the techniques of
balancing of the energy centers and efficient polarization as our planet
makes ready for harvest into Fourth Density. The nature of time/space and
space/time are examined, and some of the ramifications of meditation and
magic are discussed. A good deal of material about psychic attack and the
Orion group is included, and the volume ends with a beginning glance into
the archetypical mind.
L/L Research
Louisville, Kentucky
March 17, 1982




                                      4
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 51
                               May 13, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: As we begin Book Three of The Law of One there are a couple
of questions of fairly non-transient importance that I have and one that I
consider to be of a transient nature that I feel obligated to ask.
The first is clearing up the final point about harvest. I was wondering if
there is a supervision over the harvest and if so, why this supervision is
necessary and how it works since an entity’s harvestability is determined by
the violet ray? Is it necessary for entities to supervise the harvest, or is it
automatic?
Ra: I am Ra. In time of harvest there are always harvesters. The fruit is
formed as it will be, but there is some supervision necessary to ensure that
this bounty is placed as it should be without the bruise or the blemish.
There are those of three levels watching over harvest.
The first level is planetary and that which may be called angelic. This type
of guardian includes the mind/body/spirit complex totality or higher self of
an entity and those inner plane entities which have been attracted to this
entity through its inner seeking.
The second class of those who ward this process are those of the
Confederation who have the honor/duty of standing in the small places at
the edge of the steps of light/love so that those entities being harvested will
not, no matter how confused or unable to make contact with their higher
self, stumble and fall away for any reason other than the strength of the
light. These Confederation entities catch those who stumble and set them
aright so that they may continue into the light.
The third group watching over this process is that group you call the
Guardians. This group is from the octave above our own and serves in this
manner as light bringers. These Guardians provide the precise emissions of
light/love in exquisitely fastidious disseminations of discrimination so that
the precise light/love vibration of each entity may be ascertained.
Thus the harvest is automatic in that those harvested will respond according
to that which is unchangeable during harvest. That is the violet ray
emanation. However, these helpers are around to ensure a proper harvesting


                                       5
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 51

so that each entity may have the fullest opportunity to express its violet ray
selfhood.
Questioner: This next question I feel to be a transient type of question;
however, it has been asked me by one whom I have communicated with
who has been involved intensely in the UFO portion of the phenomenon. If
you deem it too transient or unimportant we’ll skip it, but I have been
asked how it is possible for the craft of the fourth-density to get here since it
seems that as you approach the velocity of light the mass approaches
infinity. My question would be why craft would be necessary at all?
Ra: I am Ra. You have asked several questions. We shall respond in turn.
Firstly, we agree that this material is transient.
Secondly, those for the most part coming from distant points, as you term
them, do not need craft as you know them. The query itself requires
understanding which you do not possess. We shall attempt to state what
may be stated.
Firstly, there are a few third-density entities who have learned how to use
craft to travel between star systems while experiencing the limitations you
now understand. However, such entities have learned to use hydrogen in a
way different from your understanding now. These entities still take quite
long durations of time, as you measure it, to move about. However, these
entities are able to use hypothermia to slow the physical and mental
complex processes in order to withstand the duration of flight. Those such
as are from Sirius are of this type. There are two other types.
One is the type which, coming from fourth, fifth, or sixth density in your
own galaxy, has access to a type of energy system which uses the speed of
light as a slingshot and thus arrives where it wishes without any perceptible
time elapsed in your view.
The other type of experience is that of fourth, fifth, and sixth densities of
other galaxies and some within your own galaxy which have learned the
necessary disciplines of personality to view the universe as one being and,
therefore, are able to proceed from locus to locus by thought alone,
materializing the necessary craft, if you will, to enclose the light body of the
entity.
Questioner: I assume that that latter type is the type we experience with the
landings of the Orion group. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The Orion group is mixed between the penultimate and the
latter groups.

                                        6
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 51

Questioner: Why is a vehicle necessary for this transition? When you, as Ra,
went to Egypt earlier you used bell-shaped craft, but you did this by
thought. Can you tell me why you used a vehicle rather than just
materializing the body?
Ra: I am Ra. The vehicle or craft is that thought-form upon which our
concentration may function as motivator. We would not choose to use our
mind/body/spirit complexes as the focus for such a working.
Questioner: Thank you. It seems to me, and you can tell me where I am
going wrong with this statement, that we have seven bodies each
corresponding to one of the seven colors of the spectrum and that energy
that creates these seven bodies is a universal type of energy that streams into
our planetary environment and comes in through the seven energy centers
that we have called chakras to develop and perfect these bodies. Each of
these bodies is somehow related to the mental configuration that we have
and the perfection of these bodies and the total in-streaming of this energy
is a function of this mental configuration, and through this mental
configuration we may block, to some extent, the in-streamings of energy
that created these seven bodies. Could you comment on where I am wrong
and correct that which I have stated?
Ra: I am Ra. Your statement is substantially correct. To use the term
“mental configuration” is to oversimplify the manners of blockage of in-
streaming which occur in your density. The mind complex has a
relationship to the spirit and body complexes which is not fixed. Thus
blockages may occur betwixt spirit and mind, or body and mind, upon
many different levels. We reiterate that each energy center has seven sub-
colors, let us say, for convenience. Thus spiritual/mental blockages
combined with mental/bodily blockages may affect each of the energy
centers in several differing ways. Thus you may see the subtle nature of the
balancing and evolutionary process.
Questioner: I am unsure as to whether this will provide an avenue of
questioning that will be fruitful, but I will ask this question since it seems to
me that there is a connection here.
On the back of the book, Secrets of the Great Pyramid, there are several
reproductions of Egyptian drawings or works, some showing birds flying
over horizontal entities. Could you tell me what this is and if it has any
relationship to Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. These drawings of which you speak are some of many which
distort the teaching of our perception of death as the gateway to further
experience. The distortions concern those considerations of specific nature

                                        7
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 51

as to processes of the so-called “dead” mind/body/spirit complex. This may
be termed, in your philosophy, the distortion of Gnosticism: that is, the
belief that one may achieve knowledge and a proper position by means of
carefully perceived and accentuated movements, concepts, and symbols. In
fact, the process of the physical death is as we have described before: one in
which there is aid available and the only need at death is the releasing of
that entity from its body by those around it and the praising of the process
by those who grieve. By these means may the mind/body/spirit which has
experienced physical death be aided, not by the various perceptions of
careful and repeated rituals.
Questioner: You spoke at an earlier time of rotational speeds of energy
centers. Am I correct in assuming that this is a function of the blockage of
the energy center so that when it is less blocked, the speed of rotation is
higher and the energy instreaming is greater?
Ra: I am Ra. You are partially correct. In the first three energy centers a full
unblocking of this energy will create speeds of rotation. As the entity
develops the higher energy centers, however, these centers will then begin to
express their nature by forming crystal structures. This is the higher or more
balanced form of activation of energy centers as the space/time nature of
this energy is transmuted to the time/space nature of regularization and
balance.
Questioner: What do you mean by crystal structures?
Ra: I am Ra. Each of the energy centers of the physical complex may be
seen to have a distinctive crystalline structure in the more developed entity.
Each will be somewhat different just as in your world no two snowflakes are
alike. However, each is regular. The red energy center often is in the shape
of the spoked wheel. The orange energy center in the flower shape
containing three petals.
The yellow center again in a rounded shape, many faceted, as a star.
The green energy center sometimes called the lotus-shape, the number of
points of crystalline structure dependent upon the strength of this center.
The blue energy center capable of having perhaps one hundred facets and
capable of great flashing brilliance.
The indigo center a more quiet center which has the basic triangular or
three-petalled shape in many, although some adepts who have balanced the
lower energies may create more faceted forms.



                                       8
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 51

The violet energy center is the least variable and is sometimes described in
your philosophy as thousand-petalled as it is the sum of the
mind/body/spirit complex distortion totality.
Questioner: Right now I feel a feeling at the indigo center. If this center
were totally activated and not blocked at all, would I then feel nothing
there?
Ra: I am Ra. This query, if answered, would infringe upon the Law of
Confusion.
Questioner: Immediately after the death of the physical body you have
stated that the primary activated body is the indigo, and you stated that it is
the form-maker. Why is this so?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this session of working.
The indigo body may be seen to be an analog for intelligent energy. It is, in
microcosm, the Logos. The intelligent energy of the mind/body/spirit
complex totality draws its existence from intelligent infinity or the Creator.
This Creator is to be understood, both in macrocosm and microcosm, to
have, as we have said, two natures: the unpotentiated infinity which is
intelligent; this is all that there is.
Free will has potentiated, both the Creator of us all and our selves as co-
Creators with intelligent infinity which has will. This will may be drawn
upon by the indigo or form-making body and its wisdom used to then
choose the appropriate locus and type of experience which this co-Creator
or sub-sub-Logos you call so carelessly a person will take.
I am Ra. This is the time for any brief queries.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. You are conscientious. I leave you now, my
brothers, in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth,
then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                       9
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 52
                               May 19, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: In the previous session you stated: “The other type of
experience is the fourth, fifth, and sixth densities of other galaxies and some
within your own galaxy which have learned necessary disciplines of
personality to view the universe as one being are able to proceed from locus
to locus by thought alone, materializing the necessary craft.” I would like to
ask you when you say fourth, fifth, and sixth densities of other galaxies,
some within your own galaxy, are you stating here that more of the entities
in other galaxies have developed the abilities of personality than have those
in this galaxy for this type of travel? I am using the term galaxy with respect
to the lenticular shape of billions of stars.
Ra: I am Ra. We have once again used a meaning for this term, galaxy, that
does not lie within your vocabulary at this time, if you will call it so. We
referred to your star system.
It is incorrect to assume that other star systems are more able to manipulate
the dimensions than your own. It is merely that there are many other
systems besides your own.
Questioner: Thank you. I think that possibly I am on an important point
here because it seems to me that the great work in evolution is the discipline
of personality, and it seems that we have two types of entities moving
around the universe, one stemming from disciplines of personality, and the
other stemming from what you call the slingshot effect. I won’t even get
into the sub-light speeds because I don’t consider that too important. I only
consider this material important because of the fact that we are considering
disciplines of the personality.
Is the use of the slingshot effect for travel what you might call an intellectual
or a left brain type of involvement of understanding rather than a right
brain type?
Ra: I am Ra. Your perception on this point is extensive. You penetrate the
outer teaching. We prefer not to utilize the terminology of right and left
brain due to the inaccuracies of this terminology. Some functions are
repetitive or redundant in both lobes, and further, to some entities the
functions of the right and left are reversed. However, the heart of the query
is worth some consideration.

                                       10
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 52

The technology of which you, as a social complex, are so enamored at this
time is but the birthing of the manipulation of the intelligent energy of the
sub-Logos which, when carried much further, may evolve into technology
capable of using the gravitic effects of which we spoke.
We note that this term is not accurate but there is no closer term.
Therefore, the use of technology to manipulate that outside the self is far,
far less of an aid to personal evolution than the disciplines of the
mind/body/spirit complex resulting in the whole knowledge of the self in
the microcosm and macrocosm.
To the disciplined entity, all things are open and free. The discipline which
opens the universes opens also the gateways to evolution. The difference is
that of choosing either to hitchhike to a place where beauty may be seen or
to walk, step by step, independent and free in this independence to praise
the strength to walk and the opportunity for the awareness of beauty.
The hitchhiker, instead, is distracted by conversation and the vagaries of the
road and, dependent upon the whims of others, is concerned to make the
appointment in time. The hitchhiker sees the same beauty but has not
prepared itself for the establishment, in the roots of mind, of the experience.
Questioner: I would ask this question in order to understand the mental
disciplines and how they evolve. Does fourth, fifth, and sixth-density
positive or service-to-others orientation of social memory complexes use
both the slingshot and the personality disciplines type of effect for travel or
do they use only one?
Ra: I am Ra. The positively oriented social memory complex will be
attempting to learn the disciplines of mind, body, and spirit. However,
there are some which, having the technology available to use intelligent
energy forces to accomplish travel, do so while learning the more
appropriate disciplines.
Questioner: Then I am assuming that in the more positively oriented social
memory complexes a much higher percentage of them use the personality
disciplines for this travel. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. As positive fifth-density moves into sixth there
are virtually no entities which any longer use outer technology for travel or
communication.
Questioner: Could you give me the same information on the negatively
oriented social memory complexes as to the ratios and as to how they use
the slingshot effect or the disciplines of the personality for travel?


                                       11
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 52

Ra: I am Ra. The fourth-density negative uses the slingshot gravitic light
effect, perhaps 80% of its membership being unable to master the
disciplines necessary for alternate methods of travel. In fifth-density negative
approximately 50% at some point gain the necessary discipline to use
thought to accomplish travel. As the sixth-density approaches, the negative
orientation is thrown into confusion and little travel is attempted. What
travel is done is perhaps 73% of light/thought.
Questioner: Is there any difference close to the end of fifth-density in the
disciplines of personality between positive and negative orientation?
Ra: I am Ra. There are patent differences between the polarities but no
difference whatsoever in the completion of the knowledge of the self
necessary to accomplish this discipline.
Questioner: Am I correct, then, in assuming that discipline of the
personality, knowledge of self, and control in strengthening of the will
would be what any fifth-density entity would see as those things of
importance?
Ra: I am Ra. In actuality these things are of importance in third through
early seventh densities. The only correction in nuance that we would make
is your use of the word, control. It is paramount that it be understood that
it is not desirable or helpful to the growth of the understanding, may we
say, of an entity by itself to control thought processes or impulses except
where they may result in actions not consonant with the Law of One.
Control may seem to be a short-cut to discipline, peace, and illumination.
However, this very control potentiates and necessitates the further
incarnative experience in order to balance this control or repression of that
self which is perfect.
Instead, we appreciate and recommend the use of your second verb in
regard to the use of the will. Acceptance of self, forgiveness of self, and the
direction of the will; this is the path towards the disciplined personality.
Your faculty of will is that which is powerful within you as co-Creator. You
cannot ascribe to this faculty too much importance. Thus it must be
carefully used and directed in service-to-others for those upon the positively
oriented path.
There is great danger in the use of the will as the personality becomes
stronger, for it may be used even subconsciously in ways reducing the
polarity of the entity.
Questioner: I sense, possibly, a connection between what you just said and
why so many Wanderers have selected the harvest time on this planet to
incarnate. Am I correct?
                                      12
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 52

Ra: I am Ra. It is correct that in the chance to remember that which has
been lost in the forgetting there is a nimiety of opportunity for positive
polarization. We believe this is the specific thrust of your query. Please ask
further if it is not.
Questioner: I would just include the question as to why the time of harvest
is selected by so many Wanderers as time for incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. There are several reasons for incarnation during harvest. They
may be divided by the terms self and other-self.
The overriding reason for the offering of these Brothers and Sisters of
Sorrow in incarnative states is the possibility of aiding other-selves by the
lightening of the planetary consciousness distortions and the probability of
offering catalyst to other-selves which will increase the harvest.
There are two other reasons for choosing this service which have to do with
the self.
The Wanderer, if it remembers and dedicates itself to service, will polarize
much more rapidly than is possible in the far more etiolated realms of
higher density catalyst.
The final reason is within the mind/body/spirit totality or the social
memory complex totality which may judge that an entity or members of a
societal entity can make use of third-density catalyst to recapitulate a
learning/teaching which is adjudged to be less than perfect. This especially
applies to those entering into and proceeding through sixth-density wherein
the balance between compassion and wisdom is perfected.
Questioner: Thank you. Just as something that I am a little inquisitive
about, but which is not of much importance, I would like to make a
statement which I intuitively hunch. I may be wrong.
You were speaking of the slingshot effect and that term has puzzled me.
The only thing that I can see is that you must put energy into a craft until it
approaches the velocity of light and this of course requires more and more
energy. The time dilation occurs and it seems to me that it would be
possible to, by moving at 90° to the direction of travel, somehow change
this stored energy in its application of direction or sense so that you move
out of space/time into time/space with a 90° deflection. Then the energy
would be taken out in time/space and you would re-enter space/time at the
end of this energy burst. Am I in any way correct on this?
Ra: I am Ra. You are quite correct as far as your language may take you and,
due to your training, more able than we to express the concept. Our only

                                       13
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 52

correction, if you will, would be to suggest that the 90° of which you speak
are an angle which may best be understood as a portion of a tesseract.
Questioner: Thank you. Just a little point that was bothering me of no real
importance.
Is there then, from the point of view of an individual who wishes to follow
the service-to-others path, anything of importance other than disciplines of
personality, knowledge of self, and strengthening of will?
Ra: I am Ra. This is technique. This is not the heart. Let us examine the
heart of evolution.
Let us remember that we are all one. This is the great learning/teaching. In
this unity lies love. This is a great learn/teaching. In this unity lies light.
This is the fundamental teaching of all planes of existence in
materialization. Unity, love, light, and joy; this is the heart of evolution of
the spirit.
The second-ranking lessons are learn/taught in meditation and in service. At
some point the mind/body/spirit complex is so smoothly activated and
balanced by these central thoughts or distortions that the techniques you
have mentioned become quite significant. However, the universe, its
mystery unbroken, is one. Always begin and end in the Creator, not in
technique.
Questioner: In the previous session you mentioned the lightbringers from
the octave. Am I to understand that those who provide the light for the
graduation are of an octave above the one we experience? Could you tell me
more about these lightbringers, who they are, etc.?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
This octave density of which we have spoken is both omega and alpha, the
spiritual mass of the infinite universes becoming one central sun or Creator
once again. Then is born a new universe, a new infinity, a new Logos which
incorporates all that the Creator has experienced of Itself. In this new octave
there are also those who wander. We know very little across the boundary of
octave except that these beings come to aid our octave in its Logos
completion. Is there any brief query which you have at this time?
Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument has some distortion in the area of the lungs
which has been well compensated for by the position of the physical
complex.

                                       14
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 52

All is well.
We leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     15
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 53
                              May 25, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I would first like to ask what is the instrument’s condition and
then ask two questions for her. She would like to know if she can now do
one exercise period per day, and also is the pain she feels prior to doing a
session due to an Orion attack?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument’s condition is as previously stated. In answer
to the question of exercise, now that the intensive period is over, this
instrument may, if it chooses, exercise one period rather than two. In
scanning this instrument’s physical complex distortions we find the current
period of exercise at the limit of this instrument’s strength. This is well in
the long run due to a cumulative building up of the vital energies. In the
short run it is wearying to this entity. Thus we suggest the entity be aware
of our previous admonitions regarding other aids to appropriate bodily
distortions. In answer to the second query we may say that the physical
complex difficulties prior to contact with our social memory complex are
due to the action of the subconscious will of the instrument. This will is
extremely strong and requires the mind/body/spirit complex to reserve all
available physical and vital energies for the contact. Thus the discomforts
are experienced due to the dramatic distortion towards physical weakness
while this energy is diverted. The entity is, it may be noted, also under
psychic attack, and this intensifies pre-existing conditions and is responsible
for the cramping and the dizziness as well as mind complex distortions.
Questioner: Thank you. I would like to know if (name) may attend one of
these sessions in the very near future?
Ra: I am Ra. The mind/body/spirit complex, (name), belongs with this
group in the spirit and is welcome. You may request that special meditative
periods be set aside until the entity sits with this working. We might suggest
that a photograph of the one known as (name) be sent to this entity with his
writing upon it indicating love and light. This held while meditating will
bring the entity into peaceful harmony with each of you so that there be no
extraneous waste of energy while greetings are exchanged between two
entities, both of whom have a distortion towards solitude and shyness, as
you would call it. The same might be done with a photograph of the entity,
(name), for the one known as (name).


                                      16
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 53

Questioner: Thank you. During my trip to Laramie certain things became
apparent to me with respect to dissemination of the first book of the Law of
One to those who have had experiences with UFOs and other Wanderers,
and I will have to ask some questions now that I may have to include in
Book One to eliminate a misunderstanding that I am perceiving as a
possibility in Book One. Therefore, these questions, although for the most
part transient, are aimed at eliminating certain distortions with respect to
the understanding of the material in Book One. I hope that I am using the
correct approach here. You may not be able to answer some of them, but
that’s all right. We’ll just go on to others then if you can’t answer the ones I
ask.
Can you tell me of the various techniques used by the service-to-others
positively oriented Confederation contacts with the people of this planet,
the various forms and techniques of making contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We could.
Questioner: Would you do this please?
Ra: I am Ra. The most efficient mode of contact is that which you
experience at this space/time. The infringement upon free will is greatly
undesired. Therefore, those entities which are Wanderers upon your plane
of illusion will be the only subjects for the thought projections which make
up the so-called “close encounters” and meetings between positively
oriented social memory complexes and Wanderers.
Questioner: Could you give me an example of one of these meetings
between a social memory complex and a Wanderer as to what the Wanderer
would experience?
Ra: I am Ra. One such example of which you are familiar is that of the one
                    1
known as Morris. In this case the previous contact which other entities in
this entity’s circle of friends experienced was negatively oriented. However,
you will recall that the entity, Morris, was impervious to this contact and
could not see, with the physical optical apparatus, this contact.
However, the inner voice alerted the one known as Morris to go by itself to
another place and there an entity with the thought-form shape and
appearance of the other contact appeared and gazed at this entity, thus
awakening in it the desire to seek the truth of this occurrence and of the
experiences of its incarnation in general.

1
 This refers to Case #1 in Secrets of the UFO by D. T. Elkins with Carla L.
Rueckert, Louisville, KY., L/L Research, 1976, p. 10-11.

                                        17
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 53

The feeling of being awakened or activated is the goal of this type of
contact. The duration and imagery used varies depending upon the
subconscious expectations of the Wanderer which is experiencing this
opportunity for activation.
Questioner: In a “close encounter” by a Confederation type of craft I am
assuming that this “close encounter” is with a thought-form type of craft.
Have Wanderers within the past few years had “close encounters” with
landed thought-form type of craft?
Ra: I am Ra. This has occurred although it is much less common than the
Orion type of so-called “close encounter.” We may note that in a universe
of unending unity the concept of a “close encounter” is humorous, for are
not all encounters of a nature of self with self? Therefore, how can any
encounter be less than very, very close?
Questioner: Well, talking about this type of encounter of self to self, have
any Wanderers of a positive polarization ever had a so-called “close
encounter” with the Orion or negatively oriented polarization?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Why does this occur?
Ra: I am Ra. When it occurs it is quite rare and occurs either due to the
Orion entities’ lack of perception of the depth of positivity to be
encountered or due to the Orion entities’ desire to, shall we say, attempt to
remove this positivity from this plane of existence. Orion tactics normally
are those which choose the simple distortions of mind which indicate less
mental and spiritual complex activity.
Questioner: I have become aware of a very large variation in the contact
with individuals. Could you give me general examples of the methods used
by the Confederation to awaken or partially awaken the Wanderers they
contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The methods used to awaken Wanderers are varied. The
center of each approach is the entrance into the conscious and subconscious
in such a way as to avoid causing fear and to maximize the potential for an
understandable subjective experience which has meaning for the entity.
Many such occur in sleep; others in the midst of many activities during the
waking hours. The approach is flexible and does not necessarily include the
“close encounter” syndrome as you are aware.
Questioner: What about the physical examination syndrome. How does
that relate to Wanderers and Confederation and Orion contacts?

                                      18
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 53

Ra: I am Ra. The subconscious expectations of entities cause the nature and
detail of thought-form experience offered by Confederation thought-form
entities. Thus if a Wanderer expects a physical examination, it will perforce
be experienced with as little distortion towards alarm or discomfort as is
allowable by the nature of the expectations of the subconscious distortions
of the Wanderer.
Questioner: Well, are those who are taken on both Confederation and
Orion craft then experiencing a seeming physical examination?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query indicates incorrect thinking. The Orion group uses
the physical examination as a means of terrifying the individual and causing
it to feel the feelings of an advanced second-density being such as a
laboratory animal. The sexual experiences of some are a sub-type of this
experience. The intent is to demonstrate the control of the Orion entities
over the Terran inhabitant.
The thought-form experiences are subjective and, for the most part, do not
occur in this density.
Questioner: Well, we have a large spectrum of entities on Earth with
respect to harvestability, both positively oriented and negatively oriented.
Would the Orion group target in on the ends of this spectrum, both
positively and negatively oriented, for contact with Earth entities?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is somewhat difficult to accurately answer.
However, we shall attempt to do so.
The most typical approach of Orion entities is to choose what you might
call the weaker-minded entity that it might suggest a greater amount of
Orion philosophy to be disseminated.
Some few Orion entities are called by more highly polarized negative
entities of your space/time nexus. In this case they share information just as
we are now doing. However, this is a risk for the Orion entities due to the
frequency with which the harvestable negative planetary entities then
attempt to bid and order the Orion contact just as these entities bid
planetary negative contacts. The resulting struggle for mastery, if lost, is
damaging to the polarity of the Orion group.
Similarly, a mistaken Orion contact with highly polarized positive entities
can wreak havoc with Orion troops unless these Crusaders are able to de-
polarize the entity mistakenly contacted. This occurrence is almost unheard
of. Therefore, the Orion group prefers to make physical contact only with
the weaker-minded entity.


                                      19
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 53

Questioner: Then in general we could say that if an individual has a “close
encounter” with a UFO or any other type experience that seems to be
UFO-related, he must look to the heart of the encounter and the effect
upon him to determine whether it was Orion or Confederation contact. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. If there is fear and doom, the contact was quite
likely of a negative nature. If the result is hope, friendly feelings, and the
awakening of a positive feeling of purposeful service-to-others, the marks of
Confederation contact are evident.
Questioner: Thank you. I did not wish to create the wrong impression with
the material that we are including in Book One. I may find it necessary to
add some of this material. As I say, I know that it is transient, but I believe
it is necessary for a full understanding or, shall I say, a correct approach to
the material.
I’ll ask a few questions here, but if you do not care to answer them we’ll
save them. I would like to ask, however, if you can tell me what, for the
most part, the Confederation entities look like?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth-density Confederation entity looks variously
depending upon the, shall we say, derivation of its physical vehicle.
Questioner: Do some of them look just like us? Could they pass for Earth
people?
Ra: I am Ra. Those of this nature are most often fifth-density.
Questioner: I assume that the same answer would apply to the Orion
group. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Is there any other query of a brief nature we may answer?
Questioner: I apologize for asking many transient questions during this
session. I felt it necessary to include some of this material so that those
Wanderers and others reading the first book of THE LAW OF ONE would
not get the wrong impression with respect to their experiences in contacts. I
am sorry for any problems that I might have caused.
I will just ask if there is anything that we can do to aid the contact or to aid
the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument is well. Please guard your alignments carefully.
We leave you now, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one


                                       20
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 53

infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      21
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 54
                                May 29, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I would like to trace the energy that I assume comes from the
Logos. I will make a statement and let you correct me and expand on my
concept.
From the Logos comes all frequencies of radiation of light. These
frequencies of radiation make up all of the densities of experience that are
created by that Logos. I am assuming that the planetary system of our sun,
in all of its densities, is the total of the experience created by our sun as a
Logos. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I am assuming that the different frequencies are separated, as
we have said, into the seven colors, and I am assuming that each of these
colors may be the basic frequency for a sub-Logos of our sun Logos and that
a sub-Logos or, shall we say, an individual may activate any one of these
basic frequencies or colors and use the body that is generated from the
activation of the frequency or color. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. If we grasp your query correctly this is not correct in that the
sub-sub-Logos resides, not in dimensionalities, but only in co-Creators, or
mind/body/spirit complexes.
Questioner: What I meant was that a mind/body/spirit complex can then
have any body activated that is one of the seven rays. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct in the same sense as it is correct to state that
any one may play a complex instrument which develops an euphonious
harmonic vibration complex such as your piano and can play this so well
that it might offer concerts to the public, as you would say. In other words,
although it is true that each true color vehicle is available potentially there is
skill and discipline needed in order to avail the self of the more advanced or
lighter vehicles.
Questioner: I have made these statements to get to the basic question which
I wish to ask. It is a difficult question to ask.
We have, coming from the sub-Logos we call our sun, intelligent energy.
This intelligent energy is somehow modulated or distorted so that it ends
up as a mind/body/spirit complex with certain distortions of personality
                                       22
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

which are necessary for the mind/body/spirit complex or mental portion of
that complex to undistort in order to conform once more with the original
intelligent energy.
First, I want to know if my statement on that is correct, and, secondly, I
want to know why this is the way that it is and if there is any answer other
than the first distortion of the Law of One for this?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement is substantially correct. If you will penetrate
the nature of the first distortion in its application of self knowing self, you
may begin to distinguish the hallmark of an infinite Creator, variety. Were
there no potentials for misunderstanding and, therefore, understanding,
there would be no experience.
Questioner: OK. Once a mind/body/spirit complex becomes aware of this
process it then decides that in order to have the full abilities of the Creator
it is necessary to reharmonize its thinking with the Original Creative
Thought in precise vibration or frequency of vibration. In order to do this it
is necessary to discipline the personality so that it precisely conforms to the
Original Thought, and this is broken into seven areas of discipline each
corresponding to one of the colors of the spectrum. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement, though correct, bears great potential for being
misunderstood. The precision with which each energy center matches the
Original Thought lies not in the systematic placement of each energy nexus
but rather in the fluid and plastic placement of the balanced blending of
these energy centers in such a way that intelligent energy is able to channel
itself with minimal distortion.
The mind/body/spirit complex is not a machine. It is rather what you might
call a tone poem.
Questioner: Do all mind/body/spirit complexes in the entire creation have
seven energy centers?
Ra: I am Ra. These energy centers are in potential in macrocosm from the
beginning of creation by the Logos. Coming out of timelessness, all is
prepared. This is so of the infinite creation.
Questioner: Then I will assume that the Creator in its intelligent appraisal
of the ways of knowing Itself, created the concept of the seven areas of
knowing. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially incorrect. The Logos creates light. The nature
of this light thus creates the nature of the catalytic and energetic levels of
experience in the creation. Thus it is that the highest of all honor/duties,

                                       23
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

that given to those of the next octave, is the supervision of light in its
manifestations during the experiential times, if you will, of your cycles.
Questioner: I will make another statement. The mind/body/spirit complex
may choose, because of the first distortion, the mental configuration that is
sufficiently displaced from the configuration of the intelligent energy in a
particular frequency or color of in-streaming energy so as to block a portion
of instreaming energy in that particular frequency or color. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Can you give me an idea of the maximum percentage of this
energy it is possible to block in any one color?
Ra: I am Ra. There may be, in an entity’s pattern of in-streaming energy, a
complete blockage in any energy or color or combination of energies or
colors.
Questioner: OK. Then I assume that the first distortion is the motivator or
what allows this blockage. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We wish no quibbling but prefer to avoid the use of terms
such as the verb, to allow. Free will does not allow, nor would
predetermination disallow, experiential distortions. Rather the Law of
Confusion offers a free reach for the energies of each mind/body/spirit
complex. The verb, to allow, would be considered pejorative in that it
suggests a polarity between right and wrong or allowed and not allowed.
This may seem a minuscule point. However, to our best way of thinking it
bears some weight.
Questioner: Thank you. It bears weight to my own way of thinking also. I
appreciate what you have told me.
Now, I would like to then consider the origin of catalyst. First we have the
condition of mind/body/spirit complex which, as a function of the first
distortion, has reached a condition of blockage or partial blockage of one or
more energy centers. I will assume that catalyst is necessary only if there is at
least partial blockage of one energy center. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Could you tell me why?
Ra: I am Ra. While it is a primary priority to activate or unblock each
energy center, it is also a primary priority at that point to begin to refine the
balances between the energies so that each tone of the chord of total
vibratory being-ness resonates in clarity, tune, and harmony with each other
energy. This balancing, tuning, and harmonizing of the self is most central
                                       24
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

to the more advanced or adept mind/body/spirit complex. Each energy may
be activated without the beauty that is possible through the disciplines and
appreciations of personal energies or what you might call the deeper
personality or soul identity.
Questioner: Let me make an analogy that I have just thought of. A seven-
stringed musical instrument may be played by deflecting each string a full
deflection and releasing it producing notes. instead of producing the notes
this way the individual creative personality could deflect each string the
proper amount in the proper sequence producing music. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. In the balanced individual the energies lie
waiting for the hand of the Creator to pluck harmony.
Questioner: I would like then to trace the evolution of catalyst upon the
mind/body/spirit complexes and how it comes into use and is fully used to
create this tuning. I assume that the sub-Logos that formed our tiny part of
the creation using the intelligence of the Logos of which it is a part,
provides the base catalyst that will act upon mind/body complexes and
mind/body/spirit complexes before they have reached a state of
development where they can begin to program their own catalyst. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The sub-Logos offers the catalyst at
the lower levels of energy, the first triad; these have to do with the survival
of the physical complex. The higher centers gain catalyst from the biases of
the mind/body/spirit complex itself in response to all random and directed
experiences.
Thus the less developed entity will perceive the catalyst about it in terms of
survival of the physical complex with the distortions which are preferred.
The more conscious entity being conscious of the catalytic process will
begin to transform the catalyst offered by the sub-Logos into catalyst which
may act upon the higher energy nexi. Thus the sub-Logos can offer only a
basic skeleton, shall we say, of catalyst. The muscles and flesh having to do
with the, shall we say, survival of wisdom, love, compassion, and service are
brought about by the action of the mind/body/spirit complex on basic
catalyst so as to create a more complex catalyst which may in turn be used
to form distortions within these higher energy centers.
The more advanced the entity, the more tenuous the connection between
the sub-Logos and the perceived catalyst until, finally, all catalyst is chosen,
generated, and manufactured by the self, for the self.
Questioner: Which entities incarnate at this time on this planet would be in
that category of manufacturing all of their catalyst?
                                       25
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

Ra: I am Ra. We find your query indeterminate but can respond that the
number of those which have mastered outer catalyst completely is quite
small.
Most of those harvestable at this space/time nexus have partial control over
the outer illusion and are using the outer catalyst to work upon some bias
which is not yet in balance.
Questioner: In the case of service-to-self polarization, what type of catalyst
would entities following this path program when they reach the level of
programming their own catalyst?
Ra: I am Ra. The negatively oriented entity will program for maximal
separation from and control over all those things and conscious entities
which it perceives as being other than the self.
Questioner: A positively oriented entity may select a certain narrow path of
thinking and activities during an incarnation and program conditions that
would create physical pain if this were not followed. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Would a negatively oriented entity do anything like this?
Could you give me an example?
Ra: I am Ra. A negatively oriented individual mind/body/spirit complex
will ordinarily program for wealth, ease of existence, and the utmost
opportunity for power. Thus many negative entities burst with the physical
complex distortion you call health.
However, a negatively oriented entity may choose a painful condition in
order to improve the distortion toward the so-called negative emotive
mentations such as anger, hatred, and frustration. Such an entity may use
an entire incarnative experience honing a blunt edge of hatred or anger so
that it may polarize more towards the negative or separated pole.
Questioner: Prior to incarnation, as an entity becomes more aware of the
process of evolution and has selected a path whether it be positive or
negative, at some point the entity becomes aware of what it wants to do
with respect to unblocking and balancing its energy centers. At that point it
is able to program for the life experience those catalytic experiences that will
aid it in its process of unblocking and balancing. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct.
Questioner: The purpose then, of what we call the incarnate physical state,
seems to be wholly or almost wholly that of experiencing the programmed
catalyst and then evolving as a function of that catalyst. Is that correct?
                                      26
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

Ra: I am Ra. We shall restate for clarity the purpose of incarnative existence
is evolution of mind, body, and spirit. In order to do this it is not strictly
necessary to have catalyst. However, without catalyst the desire to evolve
and the faith in the process do not normally manifest and thus evolution
occurs not. Therefore, catalyst is programmed and the program is designed
for the mind/body/spirit complex for its unique requirements. Thus it is
desirable that a mind/body/spirit complex be aware of and hearken to the
voice of its experiential catalyst, gleaning from it that which it incarnated to
glean.
Questioner: Then it seems that those upon the positive path as opposed to
those on the negative path would have precisely the reciprocal objective in
the first three rays; red, orange, and yellow. Each path would be attempting
to utilize the rays in precisely the opposite manners. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It is partially and even substantially correct. There is an energy
in each of the centers needed to keep the mind/body/spirit complex, which
is the vehicle for experience, in correct conformation and composition.
Both negative and positive entities do well to reserve this small portion of
each center for the maintenance of the integrity of the mind/body/spirit
complex. After this point, however, it is correct that the negative will use
the three lower centers for separation from and control over others by sexual
means, by personal assertion, and by action in your societies.
Contrary-wise, the positively oriented entity will be transmuting strong red-
ray sexual energy into green-ray energy transfers and radiation in blue and
indigo and will be similarly transmuting selfhood and place in society into
energy transfer situations in which the entity may merge with and serve
others and then, finally, radiate unto others without expecting any transfer
in return.
Questioner: Can you describe the energy that enters these energy centers?
Can you describe its path from its origin, its form, and its effect? I don’t
know if this is possible.
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially possible.
Questioner: Would you please do that?
Ra: The origin of all energy is the action of free will upon love. The nature
of all energy is light. The means of its ingress into the mind/body/spirit
complex is duple.
Firstly, there is the inner light which is Polaris of the self, the guiding star.
This is the birthright and true nature of all entities. This energy dwells
within.

                                        27
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

The second point of ingress is the polar opposite of the North Star, shall we
say, and may be seen, if you wish to use the physical body as an analog for
the magnetic field, as coming through the feet from the earth and through
the lower point of the spine. This point of ingress of the universal light
energy is undifferentiated until it begins its filtering process through the
energy centers. The requirements of each center and the efficiency with
which the individual has learned to tap into the inner light determine the
nature of the use made by the entity of these in-streamings.
Questioner: Does experiential catalyst follow the same path? This may be a
dumb question.
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a pointless question, for catalyst and the
requirements or distortions of the energy centers are two concepts linked as
tightly as two strands of rope.
Questioner: You mentioned in an earlier session that the experiential
catalyst was first experienced by the south pole and appraised with respect
to its survival value. That’s why I asked the question. Would you expand on
this concept?
Ra: I am Ra. We have addressed the filtering process by which in-coming
energies are pulled upwards according to the distortions of each energy
center and the strength of will or desire emanating from the awareness of
inner light. If we may be more specific, please query with specificity.
Questioner: I’ll make this statement which may be somewhat distorted and
then let you correct it. We have, coming through the feet and base of the
spine, the total energy that the mind/body/spirit complex will receive in the
way of what we call light. Each energy center then filters out and uses a
portion of this energy, red through violet. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is largely correct. The exceptions are as follows: The
energy ingress ends with indigo. The violet ray is a thermometer or
indicator of the whole.
Questioner: As this energy is absorbed by the energy centers at some point
it is not only absorbed into the being but radiates through the energy center
outwardly. I believe this begins at the blue center and also occurs in the
indigo and violet? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, we would state that we had not finished answering the
previous query and may thus answer both in part by stating that in the fully
activated entity, only that small portion of in-streaming light needed to
tune the energy center is used, the great remainder being free to be
channeled and attracted upwards.

                                     28
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 54

To answer your second question more fully we may say that it is correct that
radiation without the necessity of response begins with blue ray although
the green ray, being the great transitional ray, must be given all careful
consideration, for until transfer of energy of all types has been experienced
and mastered to a great extent, there will be blockages in the blue and
indigo radiations.
Again, the violet emanation is, in this context, a resource from which,
through indigo, intelligent infinity may be contacted. The radiation thereof
will not be violet ray but rather green, blue, or indigo depending upon the
nature of the type of intelligence which infinity has brought through into
discernible energy.
The green ray type of radiation in this case is the healing, the blue ray the
communication and inspiration, the indigo that energy of the adept which
has its place in faith.
Questioner: What if a mind/body/spirit complex feels a feeling in
meditation at the indigo center, what is he feeling?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
One who feels this activation is one experiencing in-streamings at that
energy center to be used either for the unblocking of this center, for its
tuning to match the harmonics of its other energy centers, or to activate the
gateway to intelligent infinity.
We cannot be specific for each of these three workings is experienced by the
entity which feels this physical complex distortion.
Is there a brief query before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: I just would ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Please be aware of the need for the support of the instrument’s
neck. All is well. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      29
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 55
                               June 5, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: I would first like to ask as to the condition of the instrument,
please?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is experiencing physical distortions toward
weakness of the bodily complex occurring due to psychic attack. This
instrument’s vital energies have not been affected, however, due to the aid
of those present in healing work. This instrument will apparently be subject
to such weakness distortions due to incarnative processes which predispose
the body complex towards weakness distortions.
Questioner: Is there any specific thing that we can do that you have already
told us or otherwise to alleviate this psychic attack or to help the instrument
the most?
Ra: I am Ra. We scan this instrument and find its distortion towards
appreciation of each entity and each entity’s caring, as you may call it. This
atmosphere, shall we say, offers the greatest contrast to the discomfort of
such psychic attacks, being the reciprocal, that is, the atmosphere of psychic
support.
This each of you do as a subconscious function of true attitudinal, mental,
emotional, and spiritual distortions towards this instrument. There is no
magic greater than honest distortion toward love.
Questioner: Thank you. I want to ask a couple questions about previous
material that I didn’t understand. I am hoping that this will clear up my
understanding somewhat with respect to the mental configurations with
which we have been dealing.
In the session before last you stated, “However, this is a risk for the Orion
entities due to the frequency with which the harvestable negative planetary
entities attempt to bid and order the Orion contact just as these entities bid
planetary negative contacts.” Can you explain the mechanisms that affect
polarization in consciousness with respect to this statement?
Ra: I am Ra. The negative polarization is greatly aided by the subjugation
or enslavement of other-selves. The potential between two negatively
polarized entities is such that the entity which enslaves the other or bids the
other gains in negative polarity.

                                      30
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 55

The entity so bidden or enslaved, in serving an other-self, will necessarily
lose negative polarity although it will gain in desire for further negative
polarization. This desire will then tend to create opportunities to regain
negative polarity.
Questioner: Am I to understand then that just the fact that the third-
density entity calls or bids an Orion Crusader is a polarizing type of action
that affects both entities?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The calling mechanism is not congruent in
the slightest degree with the bidding mechanism. In the calling, the entity
which calls is a suppliant neophyte asking for aid in negative understanding,
if you may excuse this misnomer. The Orion response increases its negative
polarity as it is disseminating the negative philosophy, thereby enslaving or
bidding the entity calling.
There are instances, however, when the contact becomes contest which is
prototypical of negativity. In this contest, the caller will attempt, not to ask
for aid, but to demand results. Since the third-density negatively oriented
harvestable entity has at its disposal an incarnative experiential nexus and
since Orion Crusaders are, in a great extent, bound by the first distortion in
order to progress, the Orion entity is vulnerable to such bidding if properly
done. In this case, the third-density entity becomes master and the Orion
Crusader becomes entrapped and can be bid. This is rare. However, when it
has occurred, the Orion entity or social memory complex involved has
experienced loss of negative polarity in proportion to the strength of the
bidding third-density entity.
Questioner: You mentioned that this will work when the bidding is
properly done. What did you mean by “when the bidding is properly
done”?
Ra: I am Ra. To properly bid is to be properly negative. The percentage of
thought and behavior involving service to self must approach 99% in order
for a third-density negative entity to be properly configured for such a
contest of bidding.
Questioner: What method of communication with the Orion entity would
a bidder of this type use?
Ra: I am Ra. The two most usual types of bidding are: One, the use of
perversions of sexual magic; two, the use of perversions of ritual magic. In
each case the key to success is the purity of the will of the bidder. The
concentration upon victory over the servant must be nearly perfect.



                                       31
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 55

Questioner: Can you tell me, in the polarizations in consciousness, if there
is any analogy with respect to what you just said in this type of contact with
respect to what we are doing right now in communicating with Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no relationship between this type of contact and the
bidding process. This contact may be characterized as one typical of the
Brothers and Sisters of Sorrow wherein those receiving the contact have
attempted to prepare for such contact by sacrificing extraneous, self-
oriented distortions in order to be of service.
The Ra social memory complex offers itself also as a function of its desire to
serve. Both the caller and the contact are filled with gratitude at the
opportunity of serving others.
We may note that this in no way presupposes that either the callers or those
of our group in any way approach a perfection or purity such as was
described in the bidding process. The calling group may have many
distortions and the working with much catalyst, as may those of Ra. The
overriding desire to serve others, bonded with the unique harmonics of this
group’s vibratory complexes, gives us the opportunity to serve as one
channel for the one infinite Creator.
Things come not to those positively oriented but through such beings.
Questioner: Thank you. You have stated in an earlier session that “until
transfers of energy of all types have been experienced and mastered to a
great extent, there will be blockages in the blue and in the indigo
radiations.” Could you explain that more fully?
Ra: I am Ra. At this space/time we have not covered the appropriate
intermediate material. Please requestion at a more appropriate space/time
nexus.
Questioner: I’m sort of hunting around here for an entry into some
information. I may not be looking in a productive area.
You had stated that “as we (Ra) had been aided by shapes such as the
pyramid, so we could aid your people.” These shapes have been mentioned
many, many times and you have also stated that the shapes themselves
aren’t of too much consequence. I see a relation between these shapes and
the energies that we have been studying with respect to the body, and I
would like to ask a few questions on the pyramids to see if we might get an
entry into some of this understanding.
You stated, “You will find the intersection of the triangle which is at the
first level on each of the four sides forms a diamond in a plane which is
horizontal.” Can you tell me what you meant by the word, intersection?
                                      32
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 55

Ra: I am Ra. Your mathematics and arithmetic have a paucity of
configurative descriptions which we might use. Without intending to be
obscure, we may note that the purpose of the shapes is to work with
time/space portions of the mind/body/spirit complex. Therefore, the
intersection is both space/time and time/space oriented and thus is
expressed in three dimensional geometry by two intersections which, when
projected in both time/space and space/time, form one point.
Questioner: I have calculated this point to be one-sixth of the height of the
triangle that forms the side of the pyramid. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your calculations are substantially correct and we are pleased
at your perspicacity.
Questioner: This would indicate to me that in the Great Pyramid at Giza,
the Queen’s Chamber, as it is called, would be the chamber used for
initiation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Again, you penetrate the outer teaching.
The Queen’s Chamber would not be appropriate or useful for healing work
as that work involves the use of energy in a more synergic configuration
rather than the configuration of the centered being.
Questioner: Then would the healing work be done in the King’s Chamber?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We may note that such terminology is not our
own.
Questioner: Yes, I understand that. It is just that it is the common naming
of the two chambers of the Great Pyramid. I don’t know whether this line
of questioning is going to take me to a better understanding of the energies,
but until I have explored the concepts there is nothing much that I can do
but to ask a few questions.
There is a chamber below the bottom level of the pyramid, down below
ground, that appears to be roughly in line with the King’s Chamber. What
is that chamber?
Ra: I am Ra. We may say that there is information to be gained from this
line of querying. The chamber you request to be informed about is a
resonating chamber. The bottom of such a structure, in order to cause the
appropriate distortions for healing catalyst, shall be open.
Questioner: The book, The Life Force Of The Great Pyramid, has related the
ankh shape with a resonance in the pyramid. Is this a correct analysis?



                                      33
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 55

Ra: I am Ra. We have scanned your mind and find the phrase “working
with crayons.” This would be applicable. There is only one significance to
these shapes such as the crux ansata; that is the placing in coded form of
mathematical relationships.
Questioner: Is the 76° and 18' angle at the apex of the pyramid a critical
angle?
Ra: I am Ra. For the healing work intended, this angle is appropriate.
Questioner: Why does the King’s Chamber have the various small
chambers above it?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
We must address this query more generally in order to explicate your
specific question. The positioning of the entity to be healed is such that the
life energies, if you will, are in a position to be briefly interrupted or
intersected by light. This light then may, by the catalyst of the healer with
the crystal, manipulate the aural forces, as you may call the various energy
centers, in such a way that if the entity to be healed wills it so, corrections
may take place. Then the entity is reprotected by its own, now less
distorted, energy field and is able to go its way.
The process by which this is done involves bringing the entity to be healed
to an equilibrium. This involves temperature, barometric pressure, and the
electrical charged atmosphere. The first two requirements are controlled by
the system of chimneys.
Questioner: Does this healing work by affecting the energy centers in such a
way that they are unblocked so as to perfect the seven bodies that they
generate and, therefore, bring the entity to be healed into proper balance?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity tires. We must answer in brief and state simply
that the distorted configuration of the energy centers is intended to be
temporarily interrupted and the opportunity is then presented to the one to
be healed to grasp the baton, to take the balanced route and to walk thence
with the distortions towards disease of mind, body, and spirit greatly
lessened.
The catalytic effect of the charged atmosphere and the crystal directed by
the healer must be taken into consideration as integral portions of this
process, for the bringing back of the entity to a configuration of conscious
awareness would not be accomplished after the reorganization possibilities
are offered without the healer’s presence and directed will. Are there any
brief queries before we leave this instrument?

                                      34
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 55

Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve this contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. You are conscientious. I now leave this working. I
am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     35
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 56
                                June 8, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you first please give me an indication of the
instrument’s condition?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is severely distorted towards weakness of the
mental and physical complexes at this time and is under psychic attack due
to this opportunity.
Questioner: Would it be better to discontinue the contact at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is entirely at your discretion. This instrument has some
energy transferred which is available. However, it is not great due to the
effects as previously stated.
We, if you desire to question us further at this working, will as always
attempt to safeguard this instrument. We feel that you are aware of the
parameters without further elaboration.
Questioner: In that case, I will ask how does the pyramid shape work?
Ra: I am Ra. We are assuming that you wish to know the principle of the
shapes, angles, and intersections of the pyramid at what you call Giza.
In reality, the pyramid shape does no work. It does not work. It is an
arrangement for the centralization as well as the diffraction of the spiraling
upward light energy as it is being used by the mind/body/spirit complex.
The spiraling nature of light is such that the magnetic fields of an individual
are affected by spiraling energy. Certain shapes offer an echo chamber, shall
we say, or an intensifier for spiraling prana, as some have called this all-
present, primal distortion of the one infinite Creator.
If the intent is to intensify the necessity for the entity’s own will to call forth
the inner light in order to match the intensification of the spiraling light
energy, the entity will be placed in what you have called the Queen’s
Chamber position in this particular shaped object. This is the initiatory
place and is the place of resurrection.
The off-set place, representing the spiral as it is in motion, is the appropriate
position for one to be healed as in this position an entity’s vibratory
magnetic nexi are interrupted in their normal flux. Thus a
possibility/probability vortex ensues; a new beginning, shall we say, is
                                        36
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 56

offered for the entity in which the entity may choose a less distorted, weak,
or blocked configuration of energy center magnetic distortions.
The function of the healer and crystal may not be over-emphasized, for this
power of interruption must needs be controlled, shall we say, with incarnate
intelligence; the intelligence being that of one which recognizes energy
patterns which, without judging, recognizes blockage, weakness, and other
distortion and which is capable of visualizing, through the regularity of self
and of crystal, the less distorted other-self to be healed.
Other shapes which are arched, groined, vaulted, conical, or as your tipis are
also shapes with this type of intensification of spiraling light. Your caves,
being rounded, are places of power due to this shaping.
It is to be noted that these shapes are dangerous. We are quite pleased to
have the opportunity to enlarge upon the subject of shapes such as the
pyramid for we wish, as part of our honor/duty, to state that there are many
wrong uses for these curved shapes; for with improper placement, improper
intentions, or lack of the crystallized being functioning as channel for
healing the sensitive entity will be distorted more rather than less in some
cases.
It is to be noted that your peoples build, for the most part, the cornered or
square habitations, for they do not concentrate power. It is further to be
noted that the spiritual seeker has, for many of your time periods of years,
sought the rounded, arched, and peaked forms as an expression of the
power of the Creator.
Questioner: Is there an apex angle that is the angle for maximum efficiency
in the pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. Again, to conserve this instrument’s energy, I am assuming
that you intend to indicate the most appropriate angle of apex for healing
work. If the shape is such that it is large enough to contain an individual
mind/body/spirit complex at the appropriate off-set position within it, the
76° 18', approximate, angle is useful and appropriate. If the position varies,
the angle may vary. Further, if the healer has the ability to perceive
distortions with enough discrimination, the position within any pyramid
shape may be moved about until results are effected. However, we found
this particular angle to be useful. Other social memory complexes, or
portions thereof, have determined different apex angles for different uses,
not having to do with healing but with learning. When one works with the
cone, or shall we say, the silo type of shape, the energy for healing may be
found to be in a general circular pattern unique to each shape as a function
of its particular height and width and in the cone shape, the angle of apex.

                                      37
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 56

In these cases, there are no corner angles. Thus the spiraling energy works in
circular motion.
Questioner: I will make a statement which you can correct. I intuitively see
the spiraling energy of the Giza pyramid being spread out as it moves
through the so-called King’s Chamber and refocusing in the so-called
Queen’s Chamber. I am guessing that the spread of energy in the so-called
King’s Chamber is seen in the spectrum of colors, red through violet, and
that the energy centers of the entity to be healed should be aligned with this
spread of the spectrum so that the spectrum matches his various energy
centers. Will you correct this statement?
Ra: I am Ra. We can correct this statement.
Questioner: Will you please do that?
Ra: The spiraling energy is beginning to be diffused at the point where it
goes through the King’s Chamber position. However, although the spirals
continue to intersect, closing and opening in double spiral fashion through
the apex angle, the diffusion or strength of the spiraling energies, red
through violet color values, lessens if we speak of strength, and gains, if we
speak of diffusion, until at the peak of the pyramid you have a very weak
color resolution useful for healing purposes. Thus the King’s Chamber
position is chosen as the first spiral after the centered beginning through the
Queen’s Chamber position. You may visualize the diffusion angle as the
opposite of the pyramid angle but the angle being less wide than the apex
angle of the pyramid, being somewhere between 33 and 54°, depending
upon the various rhythms of the planet itself.
Questioner: Then I assume that if I start my angle at the bottom of the
Queen’s Chamber and make a 33 to 54° angle from that point, so that half
of that angle falls on the side of the centerline that the King’s Chamber is
on, that will indicate the diffusion of the spectrum, starting from the point
at the bottom of the Queen’s Chamber; let’s say, if we were using a 40°
angle, we would have a 20° diffusion to the left of the centerline, passing
through the King’s Chamber. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this session. It is correct
that half of the aforementioned angle passes through the King’s Chamber
position. It is incorrect to assume that the Queen’s Chamber is the
foundation of the angle. The angle will begin somewhere between the
Queen’s Chamber position and thence downward towards the level of the
resonating chamber, off-set for the healing work.
This variation is dependent upon various magnetic fluxes of the planet. The
King’s Chamber position is designed to intersect the strongest spiral of the
                                       38
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 56

energy flow regardless of where the angle begins. However, as it passes
through the Queen’s Chamber position, this spiraling energy is always
centered and at its strongest point.
May we answer any brief queries at this time?
Questioner: I will just ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well, my friends. It is well, however, to be conscious of
the limitations of this instrument. We feel the alignments are excellent at
this time. I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      39
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 57
                               June 12, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: First, could you give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition, please?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is under a most severe psychic attack. This
instrument is bearing up well due to replenished vital energies and a
distortion towards a sense of proportion which your peoples call a sense of
humor.
This attack is potentially disruptive to this contact for a brief period of your
space/time.
Questioner: Is there anything in particular that we can do in addition to
what we are doing to alleviate this attack?
Ra: I am Ra. There is nothing you can do to alleviate the attack. The
understanding of its mechanism might be of aid.
Questioner: Could you tell us its mechanism?
Ra: I am Ra. The Orion group cannot interfere directly but only through
preexisting distortions of mind/body/spirit complexes.
Thus in this case, this entity reached for an heavy object with one hand and
this miscalculated action caused a deformation or distortion of the
skeletal/muscular structure of one of this instrument’s appendages.
Your aid may be helpful in supporting this instrument in the proper care of
this distortion which is equivalent to what you call your post-operative state
when bones are not firmly knit. This instrument needs to be aware of care
necessary to avoid such miscalculated actions and your support in this state
of awareness is noted and encouraged.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can specifically do to alleviate this
problem that is already existing?
Ra: I am Ra. This information is harmless, thus we share it though it is
transient, lacking the principle but only offering a specific transient effect.
The wrist area should be wrapped as in the sprained configuration, as you
call this distortion, and what you call a sling may be used on this distorted
right side of the body complex for one diurnal period. At that time

                                       40
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

symptoms, as you call these distortions, shall be reviewed and such repeated
until the distortion is alleviated.
The healing work to which each is apprentice may be used as desired.
It is to be noted that a crystal is available.
Questioner: Which crystal is that?
Ra: I am Ra. The flawed but sufficient crystal which rests upon the digit of
this instrument’s right hand.
Questioner: Would you tell me how to use that crystal for this purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a large question.
You first, as a mind/body/spirit complex, balance and polarize the self,
connecting the inner light with the upward spiraling in-pourings of the
universal light. You have done exercises to regularize the processes involved.
Look to them for the preparation of the crystallized being.
Take then the crystal and feel your polarized and potentiated balanced
energy channeled in green ray healing through your being, going into and
activating the crystalline regularity of frozen light which is the crystal. The
crystal will resound with the charged light of incarnative love, and light
energy will begin to radiate in specified fashion, beaming, in required light
vibrations, healing energy, focused and intensified towards the magnetic
field of the mind/body/spirit complex which is to be healed. This entity
requesting such healing will then open the armor of the overall violet/red
ray protective vibratory shield. Thus the inner vibratory fields, from center
to center in mind, body, and spirit, may be interrupted and adjusted
momentarily, thus offering the one to be healed the opportunity to choose a
less distorted inner complex of energy fields and vibratory relationships.
Questioner: Should the crystal be held in the right hand of the healer?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. There are two recommended configurations.
The first, the chain about the neck to place the crystal in the physical
position of the green-ray energy center. Second, the chain hung from the
right hand, out-stretched, wound about the hand in such a way that the
crystal may be swung so as to affect sensitive adjustments.
We offer this information realizing that much practice is needed to
efficiently use these energies of self. However, each has the capability of
doing so, and this information is not information which, if followed
accurately, can be deleterious.


                                         41
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

Questioner: Would an unflawed crystal be considerably more effective than
the flawed one that we have now?
Ra: I am Ra. Without attempting to deem the priorities you may choose,
we may note that the regularized or crystallized entity, in its configuration,
is as critical as the perfection of the crystal used.
Questioner: Does the physical size of the crystal have any relationship to
the effectiveness in the healing?
Ra: I am Ra. In some applications concerning planetary healing, this is a
consideration. In working with an individual mind/body/spirit complex,
the only requirement is that the crystal be in harmony with the crystallized
being. There is perhaps a lower limit to the size of what you may call a
faceted crystal, for light coming through this crystal needs to be spread the
complete width of the spectrum of the one to be healed. It may further be
noted that water is a type of crystal which is efficacious also although not as
easy to hang from a chain in your density.
Questioner: Placing the end of this pencil on my navel, would the point of
it then represent the place where the crystal should hang for proper green
ray? Is this position correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We attempt your measurements. From 2 to 5.4 centimeters
towards your heart is optimal.
Questioner: Using this piece of wood then, I would determine, from my
navel, the position to be at the top of the piece of wood. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: How does the healing that you just told us about relate to the
healing done in the King’s Chamber in the Giza pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. There are two advantages to doing this working in such a
configuration of shapes and dimensions.
Firstly, the disruption or interruption of the violet/red armoring or
protective shell is automatic.
In the second place, the light is configured by the very placement of this
position in the seven distinctive color or energy vibratory rates, thus
allowing the energy through the crystallized being, focused with the crystal,
to manipulate with great ease the undisturbed and, shall we say, carefully
delineated palate of energies or colors, both in space/time and in time/space.
Thus the unarmored being may be adjusted rapidly. This is desirable in
some cases, especially when the armoring is the largest moiety of the
possibility of continued function of body complex activity in this density.
                                      42
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

The trauma of the interruption of this armoring vibration is then seen to be
lessened.
We take this opportunity to pursue our honor/duty, as some of those
creating the pyramid shape, to note that it is in no way necessary to use this
shape in order to achieve healings, for seniority of vibration has caused the
vibratory complexes of mind/ body/spirit complexes to be healed to be less
vulnerable to the trauma of the interrupted armoring.
Furthermore, as we have said, the powerful effect of the pyramid, with its
mandatory disruption of the armoring, if used without the crystallized
being, used with the wrong intention, or in the wrong configuration, can
result in further distortions of entities which are perhaps the equal of some
of your chemicals which cause disruptions in the energy fields in like
manner.
Questioner: Is there currently any use for the pyramid shape at all that is
beneficial?
Ra: I am Ra. This is in the affirmative if carefully used.
The pyramid may be used for the improvement of the meditative state as
long as the shape is such that the entity is in Queen’s Chamber position or
entities are in balanced configuration about this central point.
The small pyramid shape, placed beneath a portion of the body complex
may energize this body complex. This should be done for brief periods only,
not to exceed 30 of your minutes.
The use of the pyramid to balance planetary energies still functions to a
slight extent, but due to earth changes, the pyramids are no longer aligned
properly for this work.
Questioner: What is the aid or the mechanism of the aid received for
meditation by an entity who would be positioned in the so-called Queen’s
Chamber position?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider the polarity of mind/body/spirit complexes. The
inner light is that which is your heart of being. Its strength equals your
strength of will to seek the light. The position or balanced position of a
group intensifies the amount of this will, the amount of awareness of the
inner light necessary to attract the in-streaming light upward spiraling from
the south magnetic pole of being.
Thus this is the place of the initiate, for many extraneous items or
distortions will leave the entity as it intensifies its seeking, so that it may
become one with this centralized and purified in-coming light.

                                        43
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

Questioner: Then if a pyramid shape is used, it would seem to me that it
would be necessary to make it large enough so that the Queen’s Chamber
position would be far enough from the King’s Chamber position so that
you could use that energy position and not be harmed by the energy
position of the King’s Chamber position. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In this application a pyramid shape may be smaller if the apex
angle is less, thus not allowing the formation of the King’s Chamber
position. Also efficacious for this application are the following shapes: the
silo, the cone, the dome, and the tipi.
Questioner: Do these shapes that you just mentioned have any of the effect
of the King’s Chamber at all, or do they have only the Queen’s Chamber
effect?
Ra: I am Ra. These shapes have the Queen’s Chamber effect. It is to be
noted that a strongly crystallized entity is, in effect, a portable King’s
Chamber position.
Questioner: Then are you saying that there is absolutely no need, use, or
good in having the King’s Chamber effect at this time in our planetary
evolution?
Ra: I am Ra. If those who desired to be healers were of a crystallized nature
and were all supplicants, those wishing less distortion, the pyramid would
be, as always, a carefully designed set of parameters to distribute light and
its energy so as to aid in healing catalyst.
However, we found that your peoples are not distorted towards the desire
for purity to a great enough extent to be given this powerful and potentially
dangerous gift. We, therefore, would suggest it not be used for healing in
the traditional, shall we say, King’s Chamber configuration which we
naively gave to your peoples only to see its use grossly distorted and our
teachings lost.
Questioner: What would be an appropriate apex angle for a tipi shape for
our uses?
Ra: I am Ra. This is at your discretion. The principle of circular, rounded,
or peaked shapes is that the center acts as an invisible inductive coil. Thus
the energy patterns are spiraling and circular. Thus the choice of the most
pleasant configuration is yours. The effect is relatively fixed.
Questioner: Is there any variation in the effect with respect to the material
of construction, the thickness of the material? Is it simply the geometry of
the shape, or is it related to some other factors?

                                      44
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

Ra: I am Ra. The geometry, as you call it, or relationships of these shapes in
their configuration is the great consideration. It is well to avoid stannous
material or that of lead or other baser metals. Wood, plastic, glass, and other
materials may all be considered to be appropriate.
Questioner: If a pyramid shape were placed below an entity, how would
this be done? Would it be placed beneath the bed? I’m not quite sure about
how to energize the entity by “placing it below.” Could you tell me how to
do that?
Ra: I am Ra. Your assumption is correct. If the shape is of appropriate size it
may be placed directly beneath the cushion of the head or the pallet upon
which the body complex rests.
We again caution that the third spiral of upward lining light, that which is
emitted from the apex of this shape, is most deleterious to an entity in
overdose and should not be used over-long.
Questioner: What would the height be, in centimeters, of one of these
pyramids for best functioning?
Ra: I am Ra. It matters not. Only the proportion of the height of the
pyramid from base to apex to the perimeter of the base is at all important.
Questioner: What should that proportion be?
Ra: I am Ra. This proportion should be the 1.16 which you may observe.
Questioner: Do you mean that the sum of the four base sides should be 1.16
of the height of the pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: By saying that the Queen’s Chamber was the initiatory place,
could you tell me what you mean by that?
Ra: I am Ra. This question is a large one. We cannot describe initiation in
its specific sense due to our distortion towards the belief/understanding that
the process which we offered so many of your years ago was not a balanced
one.
However, you are aware of the concept of initiation and realize that it
demands the centering of the being upon the seeking of the Creator. We
have hoped to balance this understanding by enunciating the Law of One,
that is, that all things are one Creator. Thus seeking the Creator is done not
just in meditation and in the work of an adept but in the experiential nexus
of each moment.


                                      45
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

The initiation of the Queen’s Chamber has to do with the abandoning of
self to such desire to know the Creator in full that the purified in-streaming
light is drawn in balanced fashion through all energy centers, meeting in
indigo and opening the gate to intelligent infinity. Thus the entity
experiences true life or, as your people call it, resurrection.
Questioner: You also mentioned that the pyramid was used for learning.
Was this the same process or is there a difference?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a difference.
Questioner: What is the difference?
Ra: I am Ra. The difference is the presence of other-selves manifesting in
space/time and after some study, in time/space, for the purpose of
teach/learning. In the system created by us, schools were apart from the
pyramid, the experiences being solitary.
Questioner: I didn’t quite understand what you meant by that. Could you
tell me more of what you are talking about?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a wide subject. Please restate for specificity.
Questioner: Did you mean that teachers from your vibration or density
were manifest in the Queen’s Chamber to teach those initiates, or did you
mean something else?
Ra: I am Ra. In our system experiences in the Queen’s Chamber position
were solitary. In Atlantis and in South America teachers shared the pyramid
experiences.
Questioner: How did this learning process take place—learning or
teaching—in the pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. How does teach/learning and learn/teaching ever take place?
Questioner: The dangerous pyramid shape for use today would be a four-
sided pyramid that was large enough to create the King’s Chamber effect. Is
that statement correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement is correct with the additional understanding
that the 76° apex angle is that characteristic of the powerful shape.
Questioner: Then I am assuming that we should not use a pyramid of 76°
at the apex angle under any circumstances. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is at your discretion.
Questioner: I will restate the question. I am assuming then that it might be
dangerous to use a 76° angle pyramid, and I will ask what angle less than
                                       46
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

76° would be roughly the first angle that would not produce this dangerous
effect?
Ra: I am Ra. Your assumption is correct. The lesser angle may be any angle
less than 70°.
Questioner: Thank you. I want to go on with more questioning on the
pyramid, but I want to ask a question that (name) has here. I’ll throw it in
at this point. Could you please expand on the concept of space/time and
time/space and how to get past this concept and what density level do these
concepts no longer affect the individual?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working. This
instrument has some vital energy left. However, we become concerned with
the increasing distortions of the body complex towards pain.
The space/time and time/space concepts are those concepts describing as
mathematically as possible the relationships of your illusion, that which is
seen to that which is unseen. These descriptive terms are clumsy. They,
however, suffice for this work.
In the experiences of the mystical search for unity, these need never be
considered, for they are but part of an illusory system. The seeker seeks the
One. The One is to be sought, as we have said, by the balanced and self-
accepting self aware, both of its apparent distortions and its total perfection.
Resting in this balanced awareness, the entity then opens the self to the
universe which it is. The light energy of all things may then be attracted by
this intense seeking, and wherever the inner seeking meets the attracted
cosmic prana, realization of the One takes place.
The purpose of clearing each energy center is to allow that meeting place to
occur at the indigo ray vibration, thus making contact with intelligent
infinity and dissolving all illusions. Service-to-others is automatic at the
released energy generated by this state of consciousness.
The space/time and time/space distinctions, as you understand them, do
not hold sway except in third-density. However, fourth, fifth, and to some
extent, sixth, work within some system of polarized space/time and
time/space.
The calculation necessary to move from one system to another through the
dimensions are somewhat difficult. Therefore, we have the most difficulty
sharing numerical concepts with you and take this opportunity to repeat
our request that you monitor our numbers and query any that seem
questionable.
Is there a brief query that we may answer before we leave this instrument?
                                      47
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 57

Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is harmonious. We greet you all in joy. The adjustments
are satisfactory.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      48
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 58
                              June 16, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you please give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. This condition is as previously noted except that the physical
distortions mentioned have somewhat increased.
Questioner: Could you tell me the cause of the increase of the physical
distortions.
Ra: I am Ra. Physical distortions of this nature are begun, as we have said,
due to overactivity of weak, as you call this distortion, portions of the body
complex. The worsening is due to the nature of the distortion itself which
you call arthritis. Once begun, the distortion will unpredictably remain and
unpredictably worsen or lessen.
Questioner: We have tried healing with the diamond crystal. I have tried
both using the crystal around my neck and dangling it from a chain held in
my right hand. I think that possibly that to do the best work on the wrist I
should dangle the crystal just below my right hand from a distance of just a
centimeter or two, holding it directly above the wrist. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This would be appropriate if you were practiced at your
healing art. To work with a powerful crystal such as you have, while unable
to perceive the magnetic flux of the subtle bodies, is perhaps the same as
recommending that the beginner, with saw and nail, create the Vatican.
There is great art in the use of the swung crystal. At this point in your
development, you would do well to work with the unpowerful crystals in
ascertaining, not only the physical major energy centers, but also the
physical secondary and tertiary energy centers and then begin to find the
corresponding subtle body energy centers. In this way, you may activate
your own inner vision.
Questioner: What type of crystal should be used for that?
Ra: I am Ra. You may use any dangling weight of symmetrical form, for
your purpose is not to disturb or manipulate these energy centers but
merely to locate them and become aware of what they feel like when in a
balanced state and when in an unbalanced or blocked state.

                                      49
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 58

Questioner: Am I correct in assuming that what I am to do is to dangle a
weight approximately two feet below my hand and place it over the body,
and when the weight starts moving in a clockwise rotational direction it
would indicate an unblocked energy center. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The measurement from hand to weight is unimportant and at
your discretion. The circular motion shows an unblocked energy center.
However, some entities are polarized the reverse of others and, therefore, it
is well to test the form of normal energy spirals before beginning the
procedure.
Questioner: How would you test?
Ra: I am Ra. Test is done by first holding the weight over your own hand
and observing your particular configuration. Then using the other-self’s
hand, repeat the procedure.
Questioner: In the case of the instrument we are concerned with the
healing of the wrists and hands. Would I then test the energy center of the
instrument’s wrist area? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We have given you general information regarding this form of
healing and have explicated the instrument’s condition. There is a line
beyond which information is an intrusion upon the Law of Confusion.
Questioner: I would like to trace the energy patterns and what is actually
happening in these patterns and flow of energy in a couple of instances. I
would first take the pyramid shape and trace the energy that is focused
somehow by this shape. I will make a statement and let you correct it.
I think that the pyramid can be in any orientation and provide some
focusing of spiraling energy, but the greatest focusing of it occurs when one
side of it is precisely parallel to magnetic north. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is substantially correct with one addition. If one corner is
oriented to the magnetic north, the energy will be enhanced in its focus
also.
Questioner: Do you mean that if I drew a line through two opposite
corners of the pyramid at the base and aimed that at magnetic north—that
would be precisely 45° out of the orientation of one side aimed at magnetic
north—that it would work just as well? Is that what you are saying?
Ra: I am Ra. It would work much better than if the pyramid shape were
quite unaligned. It would not work quite as efficiently as the
aforementioned configuration.


                                      50
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 58

Questioner: Would the pyramid shape work just as well right side up as
upside down with respect to the surface of the Earth, assuming the magnetic
alignment was the same in both cases?
Ra: I am Ra. We do not penetrate your query. The reversed shape of the
pyramid reverses the effects of the pyramid. Further, it is difficult to build
such a structure, point down. Perhaps we have misinterpreted your query.
Questioner: I used this question only to understand the way the pyramid
focuses light, not for the purpose of using one. I was just saying if we did
build a pyramid point down, would it focus at the Queen’s Chamber
position or just below it the same way as if it were point up?
Ra: I am Ra. It would only work thusly if an entity’s polarity were, for some
reason, reversed.
Questioner: Then the lines of spiraling light energy—do they originate
from a position towards the center of the Earth and radiate outward from
that point?
Ra: I am Ra. The pyramid shape is a collector which draws the in-streaming
energy from what you would term, the bottom or base, and allows this
energy to spiral upward in a line with the apex of this shape. This is also
true if a pyramid shape is upended. The energy is not Earth energy, as we
understand your question, but is light energy which is omni-present.
Questioner: Does it matter if the pyramid is solid or is made of four thin
sides, or is there a difference in effect between those two makes?
Ra: I am Ra. As an energy collector, the shape itself is the only requirement.
From the standpoint of the practical needs of your body complexes, if one is
to house one’s self in such a shape, it is well that this shape be solid sided in
order to avoid being inundated by outer stimuli.
Questioner: Then if I just used a wire frame that was four pieces of wire
joined at the apex running down to the base, and the pyramid were totally
open, this would do the same thing to the spiraling light energy? Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The concept of the frame as equal to the solid form is correct.
However, there are many metals not recommended for use in pyramid
shapes designed to aid the meditative process. Those that are recommended
are, in your system of barter, what you call expensive. The wood, or other
natural materials, or the man-made plastic rods will also be of service.
Questioner: Why is the spiraling light focused by something as open and
simple as four wooden rods joined at an apex angle?

                                       51
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 58

Ra: I am Ra. If you pictured light in the metaphysical sense, as water, and
the pyramid shape as a funnel, this concept might become self-evident.
Questioner: Thank you. I do not wish to get into subject matter of no
importance. I had assumed that questions about the pyramid were desired
by you due to the fact that some danger was involved to some who had
misused the pyramid, etc.
I am trying to understand the way light works and am trying to get a grasp
of how everything works together, and I was hoping that questions on the
pyramid would help me understand the third distortion, which is light. As I
understand it, the pyramid shape acts as a funnel increasing the density of
energy so that the individual may have a greater intensity of actually the
third distortion. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In general, this is correct.
Questioner: Then the pure crystalline shape, such as the diamond, you
mentioned as being frozen light—it seems that this third-density physical
manifestation of light is somehow a window or focusing mechanism for the
third distortion in a general sense. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct. However, it may be noted that only
the will of the crystallized entity may cause interdimensional light to flow
through this material. The more regularized the entity, and the more
regularized the crystal, the more profound the effect.
Questioner: There are many people who are now bending metal, doing
other things like that by mentally requesting this happen. What is
happening in that case?
Ra: I am Ra. That which occurs in this instance may be likened to the
influence of the second spiral of light in a pyramid being used by an entity.
As this second spiral ends at the apex, the light may be likened unto a laser
beam in the metaphysical sense and when intelligently directed may cause
bending not only in the pyramid, but this is the type of energy which is
tapped into by those capable of this focusing of the upward spiraling light.
This is made possible through contact in indigo ray with intelligent energy.
Questioner: Why are these people able to do this? They seem to have no
training; they are just able to do it.
Ra: I am Ra. They remember the disciplines necessary for this activity
which is merely useful upon other true color vibratory experiential nexi.




                                       52
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 58

Questioner: Then you are saying that this wouldn’t be useful in our present
density. Will it be useful in fourth-density on this planet in the very near
future?
Ra: I am Ra. The end of such energy focusing is to build, not to destroy,
and it does become quite useful as, shall we say, an alternative to third-
density building methods.
Questioner: Is it also used for healing?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Is there any advantage in attempting to develop these
characteristics or in being able to bend metal, etc.? What I am trying to say
is, are these characteristics a signpost of the development of an entity, or is
it merely something else? For instance, as an entity develops through his
indigo would a signpost of his development be this bending ability?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
Let us specify the three spirals of light energy which the pyramid
exemplifies. Firstly, the fundamental spiral which is used for study and for
healing. Second, the spiral to the apex which is used for building. Thirdly,
the spiral spreading from the apex which is used for energizing.
Contact with indigo ray need not necessarily show itself in any certain gift
or guidepost, as you have said. There are some whose indigo energy is that
of pure being and never is manifested, yet all are aware of such an entity’s
progress. Others may teach or share in many ways contact with intelligent
energy. Others continue in unmanifested form, seeking intelligent infinity.
Thus the manifestation is lesser signpost than that which is sensed or
intuited about a mind/body/spirit complex. This violet ray being-ness is far
more indicative of true self.
Are there any brief queries or small matters we may clear up, if we can,
before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: I did have a question on what you meant by the “third spiral”
and if that is too long I would just ask if there is anything that we can do to
make the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We may answer briefly. You may query in more detail if you
deem it desirable at another session.
If you picture the candle flame, you may see the third spiral.
This instrument is well balanced. The accoutrements are aligned well. You
are conscientious.
                                       53
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 58

I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     54
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 59
                              June 25, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first tell me the instrument’s condition and why she
feels so tired?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s condition is as previously stated. We cannot
infringe upon your free will by discussing the latter query.
Questioner: Would it be any greater protection for the instrument if (name)
changed his sitting position to the other side of the bed?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: At the end of the second major cycle there were a few hundred
thousand people on Earth. There are over four billion people on Earth
today. Were the over four billion people that are incarnate today in the
Earth planes and not incarnate at that time, or did they come in from
elsewhere during the last 25,000 years?
Ra: I am Ra. There were three basic divisions of origin of these entities.
Firstly, and primarily, those of the planetary sphere you call Maldek, having
become able to take up third-density once again, were gradually loosed from
self-imposed limitations of form.
Secondly, there were those of other third-density entrance or neophytes
whose vibratory patterns matched the Terran experiential nexus. These then
filtered in through incarnative processes.
Thirdly, in the past approximate 200 of your years you have experienced
much visiting of the Wanderers. It may be noted that all possible
opportunities for incarnation are being taken at this time due to your
harvesting process and the opportunities which this offers.
Questioner: Just to clarify that could you tell me approximately how many
mind/body/spirit complexes were transferred to Earth at the beginning of
this last 75,000 year period?
Ra: I am Ra. The transfer, as you call it, has been gradual. Over two billion
souls are those of Maldek which have successfully made the transition.
Approximately 1.9 billion souls have, from many portions of the creation,
entered into this experience at various times. The remainder are those who

                                      55
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 59

have experienced the first two cycles upon this sphere or who have come in
at some point as Wanderers; some Wanderers having been in this sphere for
many thousands of your years; others having come far more recently.
Questioner: I’m trying to understand the three spirals of light in the
pyramid shape. I would like to question on each.
The first spiral starts below the Queen’s Chamber and ends in the Queen’s
Chamber? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The first notion of upward spiraling light is
as that of the scoop, the light energy being scooped in through the
attraction of the pyramid shape through the bottom or base. Thus the first
configuration is a semi-spiral.
Questioner: Would this be similar to the vortex you get when you release
water from a bathtub?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct except that in the case of this action the cause is
gravitic whereas in the case of the pyramid the vortex is that of upward
spiraling light being attracted by the electro-magnetic fields engendered by
the shape of the pyramid.
Questioner: Then the first spiral after this semi-spiral is the spiral used for
study and healing. Relative to the Queen’s Chamber position, where does
this first spiral begin and end?
Ra: I am Ra. The spiral which is used for study and healing begins at or
slightly below the Queen’s Chamber position depending upon your Earth
and cosmic rhythms. It moves through the King’s Chamber position in a
sharply delineated form and ends at the point whereby the top approximate
third of the pyramid may be seen to be intensifying the energy.
Questioner: The first spiral is obviously different somehow from the second
and third spirals since they have different uses and different properties. The
second spiral then starts at the end of the first spiral and goes up to the
apex. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The large spiral is drawn into the
vortex of the apex of the pyramid. However, some light energy which is of
the more intense nature of the red, shall we say, end of the spectrum is
spiraled once again causing an enormous strengthening and focusing of
energy which is then of use for building.
Questioner: And then the third spiral radiates from the top of the pyramid.
Is this correct?


                                       56
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 59

Ra: I am Ra. The third complete spiral does so. This is correct. It is well to
reckon with the foundation semi-spiral which supplies the prana for all that
may be affected by the three following upward spirals of light.
Questioner: Now I am trying to understand what happens in this process.
I’ll call the first semi-spiral zero position and the other three spirals one,
two, and three, the first spiral being a study in healing. What change takes
place in light from zero position to the first spiral that makes that first spiral
available for healing?
Ra: I am Ra. The prana scooped in by the pyramid shape gains coherence of
energetic direction. The term “upward spiraling light” is an indication, not
of your up and down concept, but an indication of the concept of that
which reaches towards the source of love and light.
Thus all light or prana is upward spiraling but its direction, as you
understand this term, is unregimented and not useful for work.
Questioner: Could I assume then that from all points in space light radiates
in our illusion outward in a 360° solid angle and this scoop shape with the
pyramid then creates the coherence to this radiation as a focusing
mechanism? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.
Questioner: Then the first spiral has a different factor of cohesion, you
might say, than the second. What is the difference between this first and
second spiral?
Ra: I am Ra. As the light is funneled into what you term the zero position,
it reaches the point of turning. This acts as a compression of the light
multiplying tremendously its coherence and organization.
Questioner: Then is the coherence and organization multiplied once more
at the start of the second spiral? Is there just a doubling effect or an
increasing effect?
Ra: I am Ra. This is difficult to discuss in your language. There is no
doubling effect but a transformation across boundaries of dimension so that
light which was working for those using it in space/time—time/space
configuration becomes light working in what you might consider an inter-
dimensional time/space—space/time configuration. This causes an apparent
diffusion and weakness of the spiraling energy. However, in position two, as
you have called it, much work may be done inter-dimensionally.




                                        57
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 59

Questioner: In the Giza pyramid there was no chamber at position two. Do
you ever make use of position two by putting a chamber in that position on
other planets or in other pyramids?
Ra: I am Ra. This position is useful only to those whose abilities are such
that they are capable of serving as conductors of this type of focused spiral.
One would not wish to attempt to train third-density entities in such
disciplines.
Questioner: Then the third spiral radiating from the top of the pyramid
you say is used for energizing. Can you tell me what you mean by
“energizing”?
Ra: I am Ra. The third spiral is extremely full of the positive effects of
directed prana and that which is placed over such a shape will receive shocks
energizing the electro-magnetic fields. This can be most stimulating in
third-density applications of mental and bodily configurations. However, if
allowed to be in place over-long such shocks may traumatize the entity.
Questioner: Are there any other effects of the pyramid shape beside the
spirals that we have just discussed?
Ra: I am Ra. There are several. However, their uses are limited. The use of
the resonating chamber position is one which challenges the ability of an
adept to face the self. This is one type of mental test which may be used. It
is powerful and quite dangerous.
The outer shell of the pyramid shape contains small vortices of light energy
which, in the hands of capable crystallized beings, are useful for various
subtle workings upon the healing of invisible bodies affecting the physical
body.
Other of these places are those wherein perfect sleep may be obtained and
age reversed. These characteristics are not important.
Questioner: What position would be the age reversal position?
Ra: I am Ra. Approximately 5 to 10° above and below the Queen’s
Chamber position in ovoid shapes on each face of the four-sided pyramid
extending into the solid shape approximately one-quarter of the way to the
Queen’s Chamber position.
Questioner: In other words, if I went just inside the wall of the pyramid a
quarter of the way but still remained three-quarters of the way from the
center at approximately the level above the base of the Queen’s Chamber I
would find that position?


                                      58
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 59

Ra: I am Ra. This is approximately so. You must picture the double
teardrop extending in both the plane of the pyramid face and in half
towards the Queen’s Chamber extending above and below it. You may see
this as the position where the light has been scooped into the spiral and
then is expanding again. This position is what you may call a prana
vacuum.
Questioner: Why would this reverse aging?
Ra: I am Ra. Aging is a function of the effects of various electro-magnetic
fields upon the electromagnetic fields of the mind/body/spirit complex. In
this position there is no input or disturbance of the fields, nor is any activity
within the electro-magnetic field complex of the mind/body/spirit complex
allowed full sway. The vacuum sucks any such disturbance away. Thus the
entity feels nothing and is suspended.
Questioner: Is the pyramid shape constructed in our yard functioning
properly? Is it aligned properly and built properly?
Ra: I am Ra. It is built within good tolerances though not perfect.
However, its alignment should be as this resting place for maximum
efficacy.
Questioner: Do you mean that one of the base sides should be aligned 20°
east of north?
Ra: I am Ra. That alignment would be efficacious.
Questioner: Previously you stated that one of the base sides should be
aligned with magnetic north. Which is better, to align with magnetic north
or to align with 20° east of magnetic north?
Ra: I am Ra. This is at your discretion. The proper alignment for you of
this sphere at this time is magnetic north. However, in your query you
asked specifically about a structure which has been used by specific entities
whose energy vortices are more consonant with the, shall we say, true color
green orientation. This would be the 20° east of north.
There are advantages to each orientation. The effect is stronger at magnetic
north and can be felt more clearly. The energy, though weak, coming from
the now distant, but soon to be paramount, direction is more helpful.
The choice is yours. It is the choice between quantity and quality or wide
band and narrow band aid in meditation.
Questioner: When the planetary axis realigns, will it realign 20° east of
north to conform to the green vibration?

                                       59
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 59

Ra: I am Ra. We fear this shall be the last question as this entity rapidly
increases its distortion towards what you call pain of the body complex.
There is every indication that this will occur. We cannot speak of certainties
but are aware that the grosser or less dense materials will be pulled into
conformation with the denser and lighter energies which give your Logos its
proceedings through the realms of experience.
May we answer any brief queries at this time?
Questioner: Only if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. We are aware that you experience difficulties at this
time, but they are not due to your lack of conscientiousness or dedication. I
am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, then, rejoicing the power and the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                      60
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 60
                                 July 1, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: When you spoke in the last session of “energizing shocks”
coming from the top of the pyramid, did you mean that these came at
intervals rather than steadily?
Ra: I am Ra. These energizing shocks come at discrete intervals but come
very, very close together in a properly functioning pyramid shape. In one
whose dimensions have gone awry the energy will not be released with
regularity or in quanta, as you may perhaps better understand our meaning.
Questioner: The next statement that I will make may or may not be
enlightening to me in my investigation of the pyramid energy, but it has
occurred to me that the effect of the so-called Bermuda Triangle could be
possibly due to a large pyramid beneath the water which releases this third
spiral in discrete and varying intervals. Entities or craft that are in the
vicinity may change their space/time continuum in some way. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then this third spiral has an energizing effect that, if strong
enough, will actually change the space/time continuum. Is there a use or
value to this type of change?
Ra: I am Ra. In the hands of one of fifth-density or above this particular
energy may be tapped in order to communicate information, love, or light
across what you would consider vast distances but which with this energy
may be considered transdimensional leaps. Also, there is the possibility of
travel using this formation of energy.
Questioner: Would this travel be the instantaneous type used primarily by
sixth-density entities, or is it the sling-shot effect that you are talking about?
Ra: I am Ra. The former effect is that of which we speak. You may note
that as one learns the, shall we say, understandings or disciplines of the
personality each of these configurations of prana is available to the entity
without the aid of this shape. One may view the pyramid at Giza as
metaphysical training wheels.



                                        61
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

Questioner: Then is the large underwater pyramid off the Florida coast one
of the balancing pyramids that Ra constructed or did some other social
memory complex construct it and if so, which one?
Ra: I am Ra. That pyramid of which you speak was one whose construction
was aided by sixth-density entities of a social memory complex working
with Atlanteans prior to our working with the, as you call them, Egyptians.
Questioner: You mentioned working with one other group other than the
Egyptians. Who were they?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities were those of South America. We divided our
forces to work within these two cultures.
Questioner: The pyramid shape then, as I understand it, was deemed by
your social memory complex to be at that time of paramount importance as
the physical training aid for spiritual development. At this particular time in
the evolution of our planet it seems that you place little or no emphasis on
this shape. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. it is our honor/duty to attempt to remove the
distortions that the use of this shape has caused in the thinking of your
peoples and in the activities of some of your entities. We do not deny that
such shapes are efficacious, nor do we withhold the general gist of this
efficacy. However, we wish to offer our understanding, limited though it is,
that contrary to our naive beliefs many thousands of your years ago the
optimum shape for initiation does not exist.
Let us expand upon this point. When we were aided by sixth-density
entities during our own third-density experiences we, being less bellicose in
the extreme, found this teaching to be of help. In our naiveté in third-
density we had not developed the interrelationships of your barter or money
system and power. We were, in fact, a more philosophical third-density
planet than your own and our choices of polarity were much more centered
about the, shall we say, understanding of sexual energy transfers and the
appropriate relationships between self and other-self.
We spent a much larger portion of our space/time working with the
unmanifested being. In this less complex atmosphere it was quite instructive
to have this learn/teaching device and we benefited without the distortions
we found occurring among your peoples.
We have recorded these differences meticulously in the Great Record of
Creation that such naiveté shall not be necessary again.
At this space/time we may best serve you, we believe, by stating that the
pyramid for meditation along with other rounded and arched or pointed
                                      62
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

circular shapes is of help to you. However, it is our observation that due to
the complexity of influences upon the unmanifested being at this space/time
nexus among your planetary peoples it is best that the progress of the
mind/body/spirit complex take place without, as you call them, training
aids because when using a training aid an entity then takes upon itself the
Law of Responsibility for the quickened or increased rate of learn/teaching.
If this greater understanding, if we may use this misnomer, is not put into
practice in the moment by moment experience of the entity, then the
usefulness of the training aid becomes negative.
Questioner: Thank you. I don’t know if this question will result in any
useful information, but I feel that I must ask it. What was the ark of the
covenant, and what was its use?
Ra: I am Ra. The ark of the covenant was that place wherein those things
most holy, according to the understanding of the one called Moishe, were
placed. The article placed therein has been called by your peoples two
tablets called the Ten Commandments. There were not two tablets. There
was one writing in scroll. This was placed along with the most carefully
written accounts by various entities of their beliefs concerning the creation
by the one Creator.
This ark was designed to constitute the place wherefrom the priests, as you
call those distorted towards the desire to serve their brothers, could draw
their power and feel the presence of the one Creator. However, it is to be
noted that this entire arrangement was designed, not by the one known to
the Confederation as Yahweh, but rather was designed by negative entities
preferring this method of creating an elite called the Sons of Levi.
Questioner: Was this a device for communication then? You also said that
they drew power from it. What sort of power? How did this work?
Ra: I am Ra. This was charged by means of the materials with which it was
built being given an electromagnetic field. It became an object of power in
this way and, to those whose faith became that untarnished by
unrighteousness or separation, this power designed for negativity became
positive and is so, to those truly in harmony with the experience of service,
to this day. Thus the negative forces were partially successful but the
positively oriented Moishe, as this entity was called, gave to your planetary
peoples the possibility of a path to the one infinite Creator which is
completely positive.
This is in common with each of your orthodox religious systems which have
all become somewhat mixed in orientation, yet offer a pure path to the one
Creator which is seen by the pure seeker.

                                      63
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

Questioner: Where is the ark of the covenant now? Where is it located?
Ra: I am Ra. We refrain from answering this query due to the fact that it
does still exist and is not that which we would infringe upon your peoples
by locating.
Questioner: In trying to understand the creative energies, it has occurred to
me that I really do not understand why unusable heat is generated as our
Earth moves from third into fourth density. I know it has to do with
disharmony between the vibrations of third and fourth density but why this
would show up as a physical heating within the Earth is beyond me. Can
you enlighten me on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The concepts are somewhat difficult to penetrate in your
language. However, we shall attempt to speak to the subject. If an entity is
not in harmony with its circumstances it feels a burning within. The
temperature of the physical vehicle does not yet rise, only the heat of the
temper or the tears, as we may describe this disharmony. However, if an
entity persists for a long period of your space/time in feeling this emotive
heat and disharmony, the entire body complex will begin to resonate to this
disharmony, and the disharmony will then show up as the cancer or other
degenerative distortions from what you call health.
When an entire planetary system of peoples and cultures repeatedly
experiences disharmony on a great scale the earth under the feet of these
entities shall begin to resonate with this disharmony. Due to the nature of
the physical vehicle, disharmony shows up as a blockage of growth or an
uncontrolled growth since the primary function of a mind/body/spirit
complex’s bodily complex is growth and maintenance. In the case of your
planet the purpose of the planet is the maintenance of orbit and the proper
location or orientation with regards to other cosmic influences. In order to
have this occurring properly the interior of your sphere is hot in your
physical terms. Thus instead of uncontrolled growth you begin to
experience uncontrolled heat and its expansive consequences.
Questioner: Is the Earth solid all the way through from one side to the
other?
Ra: I am Ra. You may say that your sphere is of an honey-comb nature.
The center is, however, solid if you would so call that which is molten.
Questioner: Are there third-density entities living in the honey-comb areas?
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This was at one time correct. This is not correct at this present
space/time.

                                     64
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

Questioner: Are there any inner civilizations or entities living in these areas
other than physically incarnate who do come and materialize on the Earth’s
surface at some times?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have noted, there are some which do as you say.
Further, there are some inner plane entities of this planet which prefer to do
some materialization into third-density visible in these areas. There are also
bases, shall we say, in these areas of those from elsewhere, both positive and
negative. There are abandoned cities.
Questioner: What are these bases used for by those from elsewhere?
Ra: I am Ra. These bases are used for the work of materialization of needed
equipment for communication with third-density entities and for resting
places for some equipment which you might call small craft. These are used
for surveillance when it is requested by entities.
Thus some of the, shall we say, teachers of the Confederation speak partially
through these surveillance instruments along computerized lines, and when
information is desired and those requesting it are of the proper vibratory
level the Confederation entity itself will then speak.
Questioner: I understand then that the Confederation entity needs
communication equipment and craft to communicate with the third-
density incarnate entity requesting the information?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. However, many of your peoples request the
same basic information in enormous repetition, and for a social memory
complex to speak ad infinitum about the need to meditate is a waste of the
considerable abilities of such social memory complexes.
Thus some entities have had approved by the Council of Saturn the
placement and maintenance of these message givers for those whose needs
are simple, thus reserving the abilities of the Confederation members for
those already meditating and absorbing information which are then ready
for additional information.
Questioner: There has been, for the past 30 years, a lot of information and a
lot of confusion, and in fact, I would say that the Law of Confusion has
been working overtime—to make a small joke—in bringing information for
spiritual catalysis to groups requesting it, and we know that both the
positively and the negatively oriented social memory complexes have been
adding to this information as they can. This has led to a condition of apathy
in a lot of cases with respect to the information. Many who are truly seeking
have been thwarted by what I might call spiritual entropy in this


                                      65
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

information. Can you comment on this and the mechanisms of alleviating
these problems?
Ra: I am Ra. We can comment on this.
Questioner: Only if you deem it of importance would I request a comment.
If you deem it of no importance we’ll skip it.
Ra: I am Ra. This information is significant to some degree as it bears upon
our own mission at this time.
We of the Confederation are at the call of those upon your planet. If the
call, though sincere, is fairly low in consciousness of the, shall we say,
system whereby spiritual evolution may be precipitated, then we may only
offer that information useful to that particular caller. This is the basic
difficulty. Entities receive the basic information about the Original
Thought and the means, that is meditation and service-to-others, whereby
this Original Thought may be obtained.
Please note that as Confederation members we are speaking for positively
oriented entities. We believe the Orion group has precisely the same
difficulty.
Once this basic information is received it is not put into practice in the
heart and in the life experience but instead rattles about within the mind
complex distortions as would a building block which has lost its place and
simply rolls from side to side uselessly, yet still the entity calls. Therefore,
the same basic information is repeated. Ultimately the entity decides that it
is weary of this repetitive information. However, if an entity puts into
practice that which it is given, it will not find repetition except when
needed.
Questioner: Thank you. Are the chakras or bodily energy centers related to
or do they operate like the pyramid energy funnel?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Was there a purpose for mummification having to do with
anything other than bodily burial?
Ra: I am Ra. Much as we would like to speak to you of this distortion of
our designs in constructing the pyramid, we can say very little for the intent
was quite mixed and the uses, though many felt them to be positive, were of
a nonpositive order of generation. We cannot speak upon this subject
without infringement upon some basic energy balances between the positive
and negative forces upon your planet. It may be said that those offering
themselves felt they were offering themselves in service-to-others.
                                       66
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 60

Questioner: What civilization was it that helped Ra using the pyramid
shape while Ra was in third-density?
Ra: I am Ra. Your people have a fondness for the naming. These entities
have begun their travel back to the Creator and are no longer experiencing
time.
Questioner: The instrument wished to know, when using the pendulum in
discovering energy centers, what the back and forth motion meant instead
of the circular motion?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall have to be the final question although this entity is
still providing us with energy. It is experiencing the distortion towards pain.
The rotations having been discussed, we shall simply say that the weak back
and forth motion indicates a partial blockage although not a complete
blockage. The strong back and forth motion indicates the reverse of
blockage which is over-stimulation of a chakra or energy center which is
occurring in order to attempt to balance some difficulty in body or mind
complex activity. This condition is not helpful to the entity as it is
unbalanced. Are there any brief queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Be merry, my friends. All is well and your conscientiousness is
to be recommended. We leave you in the love and the light of the one
infinite Creator. Rejoice, then, and go forth in the peace and in the glory of
the one infinite Creator. I am Ra. Adonai.




                                      67
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 61
                               July 8, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the
infinite Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energies are improving. The physical
complex distortions are quite marked at this space/time and there is a
decrease in physical complex energies.
Questioner: Is there anything in particular that the instrument could do to
improve the physical condition?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument has two factors affecting its bodily distortions.
This is in common with all those which by seniority of vibration have
reached the green-ray level of vibratory consciousness complexes.
The first is the given in-streamings which vary from cycle to cycle in
predictable manner. In this particular entity the cyclical complexes at this
space/time nexus are not favorable for the physical energy levels.
The second ramification of condition is that which we might call the degree
of mental efficiency in use of catalyst provided for the learning of
programmed lessons in particular and the lessons of love in general.
This instrument, unlike some entities, has some further distortion due to
the use of preincarnative conditions.
Questioner: Can you expand on what you meant by the “cycling in-
streamings of energy”?
Ra: I am Ra. There are four types of cycles which are those given in the
moment of entry into incarnation. There are in addition more cosmic and
less regularized in-pourings which, from time to time, affect a sensitized
mind/body/spirit complex. The four rhythms are, to some extent, known
among your peoples and are called bio-rhythms.
There is a fourth cycle which we may call the cycle of gateway of magic of
the adept or of the spirit. This is a cycle which is completed in
approximately eighteen of your diurnal cycles.
The cosmic patterns are also a function of the moment of incarnative
entrance and have to do with your satellite you call the moon, your planets


                                      68
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 61

of this galaxy, the galactic sun, and in some cases the in-streamings from the
major galactic points of energy flow.
Questioner: Would it be helpful to plot these cycles for the instrument and
attempt to have these sessions at the most favorable points with respect to
the cycles?
Ra: I am Ra. To that specific query we have no response.
It may be noted that the three in this triad bring in this energy pattern
which is Ra. Thus each energy input of the triad is of note.
We may say that while these information systems are interesting they are in
sway only in so far as the entity or entities involved have not made totally
efficient use of catalyst and, therefore, instead of accepting the, shall we say,
negative or retrograde moments or periods without undue notice, have the
distortion towards the retaining of these distortions in order to work out the
unused catalyst.
It is to be noted that psychic attack continues upon this entity although it is
only effective at this time in physical distortions towards discomfort.
We may suggest that it is always of some interest to observe the roadmap,
both of the cycles and of the planetary and other cosmic influences, in that
one may see certain wide roads or possibilities. However, we remind that
this group is an unit.
Questioner: Is there some way that we could, as a unit then, do something
to reduce the effect of the psychic attack on the instrument and optimize
the communicative opportunity?
Ra: I am Ra. We have given you the information concerning that which
aids this particular mind/body/spirit complex. We can speak no further. It
is our opinion, which we humbly offer, that each is in remarkable harmony
with each for this particular third-density illusion at this space/time nexus.
Questioner: I would like to ask questions about healing exercises. The first
is, in the healing exercises concerning the body, what do you mean by the
disciplines of the body having to do with the balance between love and
wisdom in the use of the body in its natural functions?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall speak more briefly than usual due to this
instrument’s use of the transferred energy. We, therefore, request further
queries if our reply is not sufficient.
The body complex has natural functions. Many of these have to do with the
unmanifested self and are normally not subject to the need for balancing.
There are natural functions which have to do with other-self. Among these
                                       69
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 61

are touching, loving, the sexual life, and those times when the company of
another is craved to combat the type of loneliness which is the natural
function of the body as opposed to those types of loneliness which are of the
mind/emotion complex or of the spirit.
When these natural functions may be observed in the daily life they may be
examined in order that the love of self and love of other-self versus the
wisdom regarding the use of natural functions may be observed. There are
many fantasies and stray thoughts which may be examined in most of your
peoples in this balancing process.
Equally to be balanced is the withdrawal from the need for these natural
functions with regard to other-self. On the one hand there is an excess of
love. It must be determined whether this is love of self or other-self or both.
On the other hand there is an over-balance towards wisdom.
It is well to know the body complex so that it is an ally, balanced and ready
to be clearly used as a tool, for each bodily function may be used in higher
and higher, if you will, complexes of energy with other-self. No matter what
the behavior, the important balancing is the understanding of each
interaction on this level with other-selves so that whether the balance may
be love/wisdom or wisdom/love, the other-self is seen by the self in a
balanced configuration and the self is thus freed for further work.
Questioner: Then the second question is, could you give an example of how
feelings affect portions of the body and the sensations of the body?
Ra: I am Ra. It is nearly impossible to speak generally of these mechanisms,
for each entity of proper seniority has its own programming. Of the less
aware entities we may say that the connection will often seem random as the
higher self continues producing catalyst until a bias occurs. In each
programmed individual the sensitivities are far more active and, as we have
said, that catalyst not used fully by the mind and spirit is given to the body.
Thus you may see in this entity the numbing of the arms and the hands
signifying this entity’s failure to surrender to the loss of control over the life.
Thus this drama is enacted in the physical distortion complex.
In the questioner we may see the desire not to be carrying the load it carries
given as physical manifestation of the soreness of those muscles for carrying
used. That which is truly needed to be carried is a preincarnative
responsibility which seems highly inconvenient.
In the case of the scribe we see a weariness and numbness of feelings
ensuing from lack of using catalyst designed to sensitize this entity to quite
significant influxes of unfamiliar distortion complexes of the mental,

                                        70
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 61

emotional, and spiritual level. As the numbness removes itself from the
higher or more responsive complexes the bodily complex distortions will
vanish. This is true also of the other examples.
We would note at this time that the totally efficient use of catalyst upon
your plane is extremely rare.
Questioner: Could you tell me how you are able to give us information like
this with respect to the first distortion or Law of Confusion?
Ra: I am Ra. Each of those is already aware of this information.
Any other reader may extract the heart of meaning from this discussion
without interest as to the examples’ sources. If each was not fully aware of
these answers we could not speak.
It is interesting that in many of your queries you ask for confirmation rather
information. This is acceptable to us.
Questioner: This brings out the point of the purpose of the physical
incarnation, I believe. And that is to reach a conviction through your own
thought processes as to a solution to problems and understandings in a
totally free situation with no proof at all or anything that you would
consider proof, proof being a very poor word in itself. Can you expand on
my concept?
Ra: I am Ra. Your opinion is an eloquent one although somewhat confused
in its connections between the freedom expressed by subjective knowing
and the freedom expressed by subjective acceptance. There is a significant
distinction between the two.
This is not a dimension of knowing, even subjectively, due to the lack of
overview of cosmic and other in-pourings which affect each and every
situation which produces catalyst. The subjective acceptance of that which
is at the moment and the finding of love within that moment is the greater
freedom.
That known as the subjective knowing without proof is, in some degree, a
poor friend for there will be anomalies no matter how much information is
garnered due to the distortions which form third-density.
Questioner: The third question that I have here is, could you give examples
of bodily polarity?
Ra: I am Ra. Within the body there are many polarities which relate to the
balancing of the energy centers of the various bodies of the unmanifested
entity. It is well to explore these polarities for work in healing.

                                      71
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 61

Each entity is, of course, a potential polarized portion of an other-self.
Questioner: The last question here says that it would seem the proper
balancing exercises for all the sensations of the body would be some sort of
inactivity such as meditation or contemplation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is largely incorrect. The balancing requires a meditative
state in order for the work to be done. However, the balancing of sensation
has to do with an analysis of the sensation with especial respect to any
unbalanced leaning between the love and the wisdom or the positive and
the negative. Then whatever is lacking in the balanced sensation is, as in all
balancing, allowed to come into the being after the sensation is remembered
and recalled in such detail as to overwhelm the senses.
Questioner: Could you tell me why it is important for the appurtenances
and other things to be so carefully aligned with respect to the instrument
and why just a small ruffle in the sheet by the instrument causes a problem
with the reception of Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. We may attempt an explanation. This contact is narrow-band.
The instrument is highly sensitive. Thus we have good entry into it and can
use it to an increasingly satisfactory level.
However, the trance condition is, shall we say, not one which is without toll
upon this instrument. Therefore, the area above the entrance into the
physical complex of this instrument must be kept clear to avoid discomfort
to the instrument especially as it re-enters the body complex. The
appurtenances give to the instrument’s sensory input mental visualizations
which aid in the trance beginning. The careful alignment of these is
important for the energizing group in that it is a reminder to that support
group that it is time for a working. The ritualistic behaviors are triggers for
many energies of the support group. You may have noticed more energy
being used in workings as the number has increased due to the long-term,
shall we say, effect of such ritualistic actions.
This would not aid another group as it was designed for this particular
system of mind/body/spirit complexes and especially the instrument.
There is enough energy transferred for one more long query. We do not
wish to deplete this instrument.
Questioner: Then I will ask this question. Could you tell us the purpose of
the frontal lobes of the brain and the conditions necessary for their
activation?
Ra: I am Ra. The frontal lobes of the brain will, shall we say, have much
more use in fourth density.
                                       72
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 61

The primary mental/emotive condition of this large area of the so-called
brain is joy or love in its creative sense. Thus the energies which we have
discussed in relationship to the pyramids: all of the healing, the learning,
the building, and the energizing are to be found in this area. This is the area
tapped by the adept. This is the area which, working through the trunk and
root of mind, makes contact with intelligent energy and through this
gateway, intelligent infinity.
Are there any queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is somewhat distorted but each is doing well.
You are conscientious. We thank you for continuing to observe the
alignments and request that on each level you continue to be this fastidious
as this will maintain the contact.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth my friends, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                      73
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 62
                                July 13, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator.
Before we begin may we request that a circle be walked about this
instrument and that then each of the supporting group expel breath
forcibly, approximately two and one-half feet above the instrument’s head,
the circle then again being walked about the instrument.
(This was done as directed.)
Ra: I am Ra. We appreciate your kind cooperation. Please recheck the
alignment of perpendicularity and we will begin.
(This was done as directed.)
Ra: I am Ra. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you tell me what was wrong or what caused the
necessity for the rewalking of the circle and the purpose for the expelling of
the breath?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument was under specific psychic attack at the time
of the beginning of the working. There was a slight irregularity in the words
verbalized by your sound complex vibratory mechanisms in the protective
walking of the circle. Into this opening came this entity and began to work
upon the instrument now in trance state, as you would call it. This
instrument was being quite adversely affected in physical complex
distortions.
Thus the circle was properly walked. The breath of righteousness expelled
the thought-form and the circle again was walked.
Questioner: What was the nature of the thought-form or its affiliation?
Ra: I am Ra. This thought-form was of Orion affiliation.
Questioner: Was the attack successful in creating any further distortion in
the instrument’s physical complex?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What is the nature of this distortion?
Ra: This thought-form sought to put an end to this instrument’s
incarnation by working with the renal distortions which, although corrected

                                      74
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

upon time/space, are vulnerable to one which knows the way to separate
time/space molding and space/time distortions which are being unmolded,
vulnerable as before the, shall we say, healing.
Questioner: What detrimental effect has been done?
Ra: I am Ra. There will be some discomfort. However, we were fortunate in
that this instrument was very open to us and well-tuned. Had we not been
able to reach this instrument and instruct you, the instrument’s physical
vehicle would soon be unviable.
Questioner: Will there be any lasting effect from this attack as far as the
instrument’s physical vehicle is concerned?
Ra: I am Ra. This is difficult to say. We are of the opinion that no lasting
harm or distortion will occur.
The healer was strong and the bonds taking effect in the remolding of these
renal distortions were effective. It is at this point a question of two forms of
the leavings of what you may call a spell or a magic working; the healer’s
distortions versus the attempt at Orion distortions; the healer’s distortions
full of love; the Orion distortions also pure in separation. It seems that all is
well except for some possible discomfort which shall be attended if
persistent.
Questioner: Was the opening that was made in the protective circle
planned to be made by the Orion entity? Was it a specific planned attempt
to make an opening, or was this just something that happened by accident?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity was, as your people put it, looking for a target of
opportunity. The missed word was a chance occurrence and not a planned
one.
We might suggest in the, shall we say, future, as you measure space/time, as
you begin a working be aware that this instrument is likely being watched
for any opportunity. Thus if the circle is walked with some imperfection it
is well to immediately repeat. The expelling of breath is also appropriate,
always to the left.
Questioner: Would you expand on what you just said on the expelling of
the breath? I’m not quite sure of what you mean.
Ra: I am Ra. The repetition of that performed well at this working is
advisable if the circle is walked in less than the appropriate configuration.
Questioner: But you mentioned the expelling of the breath to the left, I
believe. Would you tell me what you meant by that?

                                       75
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

Ra: I am Ra. It is as you have just accomplished, the breath being sent
above the instrument’s head from its right side to its left.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do for the instrument after she
comes out of the trance to help her recover from this attack?
Ra: I am Ra. There is little to be done. You may watch to see if distortions
persist and see that the appropriate healers are brought into contact with
this mind/body/spirit complex in the event that difficulty persists. It may
not. This battle is even now being accomplished. Each may counsel the
instrument to continue its work as outlined previously.
Questioner: Who would the appropriate healers be, and how would we
bring them in contact with the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. There are four. The difficulty being at all noticed as bodily
distortion, the one known as (name of spiritual healer) and the one known as
(name of spiritual healer) may work upon the instrument’s bodily complex
by means of the practices which are developing in each entity. Given
persistence of distortion, the one known as (name of allopathic healer) shall
be seen. Given the continued difficulty past the point of one of your cycles
called the fortnight, the one known as (name of allopathic healer) shall be
seen.
Questioner: Does the instrument know who these people are, (name) and
(name)? I don’t know who they are?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is that the sum total of what we can do to aid the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We may note that the harmonies and loving
social intercourse which prevails habitually in this group create a favorable
environment for each of you to do your work.
Questioner: What priority, shall I say, does the Orion group place on the
reduction of effectiveness or elimination of effectiveness of this group with
respect to activities on planet Earth at this time? Can you tell me that?
Ra: I am Ra. This group, as all positive channels and supporting groups, is a
greatly high priority with the Orion group. This instrument’s bodily
distortions are its most easily unbound or unloosed distortion dissolving the
mind/body/spirit complex if the Orion group is successful; this particular
group, having learned to be without serious chinks, may we say, in mind
and spirit complex vibratory patterns. In other channels other chinks may
be more in evidence.


                                      76
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

Questioner: I’ll make this statement and you correct it. The Orion group
has an objective of the bringing of the service-to-self polarized entities to
harvest, as great a harvest as possible. This harvest will build their potential
or their ability to do work in consciousness as given by the distortion of the
Law of One called the Law of Squares or Doubling. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Are there other groups of those who are on the service-to-self
path joined with those of the Orion constellation, for instance those of
Southern Cross, presently working for the same type of harvest with respect
to Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. These you mention of Southern Cross are members of the
Orion group. It is not, shall we say, according to understood wording that a
group from various galaxies should be named by one. However, those
planetary social memory complexes of the so-called Orion constellation
have the upper hand and thus rule the other members. You must recall that
in negative thinking there is always the pecking order, shall we say, and the
power against power in separation.
Questioner: By creating as large a harvest as possible of negatively oriented
entities from Earth, then, the social memory complex of the Orion group
gains in strength. Am I correct in assuming that this strength then is in the
total strength of the complex, the pecking order remaining approximately
the same, and those at the top gaining in strength with respect to the total
strength of the social memory complex? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. To the stronger go the greater shares of
polarity.
Questioner: Is this the fourth-density group that we are talking about now?
Ra: I am Ra. There are fourth and a few fifth-density members of the Orion
group.
Questioner: Then is the top of the pecking order fifth-density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What is the objective; what does the leader, the one at the very
top of the pecking order in fifth-density of the Orion group, have as an
objective? I would like to understand his philosophy with respect to his
objectives and plans for what we might call the future or his future?
Ra: I am Ra. This thinking will not be so strange to you. Therefore, we may
speak through the densities as your planet has some negatively oriented
action in sway at this space/time nexus.
                                       77
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

The early fifth-density negative entity, if oriented towards maintaining
cohesion as a social memory complex, may in its free will determine that the
path to wisdom lies in the manipulation in exquisite propriety of all other-
selves. It then, by virtue of its abilities in wisdom, is able to be the leader of
fourth-density beings which are upon the road to wisdom by exploring the
dimensions of love of self and understanding of self. These fifth-density
entities see the creation as that which shall be put in order.
Dealing with a plane such as this third-density at this harvesting, it will see
the mechanism of the call more clearly and have much less distortion
towards plunder or manipulation by thoughts which are given to negatively
oriented entities although in allowing this to occur and sending less wise
entities to do this work, any successes redound to the leaders.
The fifth-density sees the difficulties posed by the light and in this way
directs entities of this vibration to the seeking of targets of opportunity such
as this one. If fourth-density temptations, shall we say, towards distortion of
ego, etc. are not successful the fifth-density entity then thinks in terms of
the removal of light.
Questioner: When the Orion entity who waits us seeking the opportunity
to attack is with us here can you describe his method of coming here, what
he looks like, and what his signs are? I know that this isn’t too important,
but it might give me a little insight into what we are talking about.
Ra: I am Ra. Fifth-density entities are very light beings although they do
have the type of physical vehicle which you understand. Fifth-density
entities are very fair to look upon in your standard of beauty.
The thought is what is sent for a fifth-density entity is likely to have
mastered this technique or discipline. There is little or no means of
perceiving such an entity, for unlike fourth-density negative entities the
fifth-density entity walks with light feet.
This instrument was aware of extreme coldness in the past diurnal cycle and
spent much more time than your normal attitudes would imagine to be
appropriate in what seemed to each of you an extremely warm climate. This
was not perceived by the instrument, but the drop in subjective temperature
is a sign of presence of a negative or nonpositive or draining entity.
This instrument did mention a feeling of discomfort but was nourished by
this group and was able to dismiss it. Had it not been for a random mishap,
all would have been well, for you have learned to live in love and light and
do not neglect to remember the one infinite Creator.



                                       78
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

Questioner: Then it was a fifth-density entity that made this particular
attack upon the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Isn’t this unusual that a fifth-density entity then would bother
to do this rather than sending a fourth-density servant, shall I say?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Nearly all positive channels and groups may be
lessened in their positivity or rendered quite useless by what we may call the
temptations offered by the fourth-density negative thought-forms. They
may suggest many distortions towards specific information, towards the
aggrandizement of the self, towards the flowering of the organization in
some political, social, or fiscal way.
These distortions remove the focus from the One Infinite Source of love
and light of which we are all messengers, humble and knowing that we, of
ourselves, are but the tiniest portion of the Creator, a small part of a
magnificent entirety of infinite intelligence.
Questioner: Is there something that the instrument could do or we could
do for the instrument to eliminate the problems that she has, that she
continually experiences of the cold feeling of these attacks?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would you tell me what we could do?
Ra: I am Ra. You could cease in your attempts to be channels for the love
and the light of the one infinite Creator.
Questioner: Have I missed anything now that we can do at all to aid the
instrument during, before, or after a session or at any time?
Ra: I am Ra. The love and devotion of this group misses nothing. Be at
peace. There is some toll for this work. This instrument embraces this or we
could not speak. Rest then in that peace and love and do as you will, as you
wish, as you feel. Let there be an end to worry when this is accomplished.
The great healer of distortions is love.
Questioner: I have a question that I didn’t properly answer last night for
(name). It has to do with the vibrations of the densities. I understand that
the first-density is composed of core atomic vibrations that are in the red
spectrum, second in the orange, etc. Am I to understand that the core
vibrations of our planet are still in the red and that second-density beings
are still in the orange at this space/time right now and that each density as it
exists on our planet right now has a different core vibration, or is this
incorrect?
                                      79
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 62

Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.
Questioner: Then as the fourth-density vibrations come in this means that
the planet can support entities of fourth-density core vibration. Will the
planet then still be first-density core vibration and will there be second-
density entities on it with second-density vibrations, and will there be third-
density entities on it with third-density vibrations?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working. There is energy
but the distortions of the instrument suggest to us it would be well to
shorten this working with your permission.
Questioner: Yes.
Ra: You must see the Earth, as you call it, as being seven Earths. There is
red, orange, yellow, and there will soon be a completed green color
vibratory locus for fourth-density entities which they will call Earth. During
the fourth-density experience, due to the lack of development of fourth-
density entities, the third-density planetary sphere is not useful for
habitation since the early fourth-density entity will not know precisely how
to maintain the illusion that fourth-density cannot be seen or determined
from any instrumentation available to any third-density.
Thus in fourth-density the red, orange, and green energy nexi of your
planet will be activated while the yellow is in potentiation along with the
blue and the indigo.
May we ask at this time if there be any brief queries?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: All is well. You have been most conscientious.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the glory of the love and the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      80
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 63
                               July 18, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you give me an indication of the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energies are at the distortion which is
normal for this mind/body/spirit complex. The body complex is distorted
due to psychic attack in the area of the kidneys and urinary tract. There is
also distortion continuing due to the distortion called arthritis.
You may expect this psychic attack to be constant as this instrument has
been under observation by negatively oriented force for some time.
Questioner: Is the necessity of the instrument to go to the bathroom several
times before a session due to the psychic attack?
Ra: I am Ra. In general this is incorrect. The instrument is eliminating from
the body complex the distortion leavings of the material which we use for
contact. This occurs variably, sometimes beginning before contact, other
workings this occurring after the contact.
In this particular working this entity is experiencing the aforementioned
difficulties causing the intensification of that particular
distortion/condition.
Questioner: I know that you have already answered this question, but I feel
it my duty now to ask it each time in case there is some new development,
and that is, is there anything that we can do that we aren’t doing to lessen
the effectiveness of the psychic attack upon the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue in love and praise and thanksgiving to the Creator.
Examine previous material. Love is the great protector.
Questioner: Could you give me a definition of vital energy?
Ra: I am Ra. Vital energy is the complex of energy levels of mind, body,
and spirit. Unlike physical energy, it requires the integrated complexes
vibrating in an useful manner.
The faculty of will can, to a variable extent, replace missing vital energy and
this has occurred in past workings, as you measure time, in this instrument.
This is not recommended. At this time, however, the vital energies are well-

                                      81
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

nourished in mind and spirit although the physical energy level is, in and of
itself, low at this time.
Questioner: Would I be correct in guessing that the vital energy is a
function of the awareness or bias of the entity with respect to his polarity or
general unity with the Creator or creation?
Ra: I am Ra. In a nonspecific sense we may affirm the correctness of your
statement. The vital energy may be seen to be that deep love of life or life
experiences such as the beauty of creation and the appreciation of other-
selves and the distortions of your co-Creators’ making which are of beauty.
Without this vital energy the least distorted physical complex will fail and
perish. With this love or vital energy or elán the entity may continue
though the physical complex is greatly distorted.
Questioner: I would like to continue with the questions about the fact that
in fourth-density the red, orange, and green energies will be activated;
yellow, blue, etc. being in potentiation. Right now, we have green energies
activated. They have been activated for the last 45 years. I am wondering
about the transition through this period so that the green is totally activated
and the yellow is in potentiation. What will we lose as the yellow goes from
activation into potentiation, and what will we gain as green comes into total
activation, and what is the process?
Ra: I am Ra. It is misleading to speak of gains and losses when dealing with
the subject of the cycle’s ending and the green-ray cycle beginning upon
your sphere. It is to be kept in the forefront of the faculties of intelligence
that there is one creation in which there is no loss. There are progressive
cycles for experiential use by entities. We may now address your query.
As the green-ray cycle or the density of love and understanding begins to
take shape the yellow-ray plane or Earth which you now enjoy in your
dance will cease to be inhabited for some period of your space/time as the
space/time necessary for fourth-density entities to learn their ability to
shield their density from that of third is learned. After this period there will
come a time when third-density may again cycle on the yellow-ray sphere.
Meanwhile there is another sphere, congruent to a great extent with yellow
ray, forming. This fourth-density sphere coexists with first, second, and
third. It is of a denser nature due to the rotational core atomic aspects of its
material. We have discussed this subject with you.
The fourth-density entities which incarnate at this space/time are fourth-
density in the view of experience but are incarnating in less dense vehicles


                                       82
                   The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

due to desire to experience and aid in the birth of fourth-density upon this
plane.
You may note that fourth-density entities have a great abundance of
compassion.
Questioner: At present we have, in third-density incarnation on this plane,
those third-density entities of the planet Earth who have been here for some
number of incarnations who will graduate in the three-way split, either
positive polarity remaining for fourth-density experience on this planet, the
negative polarity harvestable going to another planet, and the rest
unharvestable third-density going to another third-density planet. In
addition to these entities I am assuming that we have here some entities
already harvestable from other third-density planets who have come here
and have incarnated in third-density form to make the transition with this
planet into fourth-density, plus Wanderers.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct except we may note a small point.
The positively oriented harvested entities will remain in this planetary
influence but not upon this plane.
Questioner: I think you said there were 60 million Wanderers,
approximately, here now. Am I correct in that memory?
Ra: I am Ra. This is approximately correct. There is some excess to that
amount.
Questioner: Does that number include the harvestable entities who are
coming to this planet for the fourth-density experience?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Approximately how many are here now who have come here
from other planets who are third-density harvestable for fourth-density
experience?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a recent, shall we say, phenomenon and the number is
not yet in excess of 35,000 entities.
Questioner: Now these entities incarnate into a third-density vibratory
body. I am trying to understand how this transition takes place from third
to fourth-density. I will take the example of one of these entities of which
we are speaking who is now in a third-density body. He will grow older and
then will it be necessary that he die from the third-density physical body
and reincarnate in a fourth-density body for that transition?

                                      83
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

Ra: I am Ra. These entities are those incarnating with what you may call a
double body in activation. It will be noted that the entities birthing these
fourth-density entities experience a great feeling of, shall we say, the
connection and the use of spiritual energies during pregnancy. This is due
to the necessity for manifesting the double body.
This transitional body is one which will be, shall we say, able to appreciate
fourth-density vibratory complexes as the instreaming increases without the
accompanying disruption of the third-density body. If a third-density entity
were, shall we say, electrically aware of fourth-density in full, the third-
density electrical fields would fail due to incompatibility.
To answer your query about death, these entities will die according to third-
density necessities.
Questioner: You are saying, then, that for the transition from third to
fourth-density for one of the entities with doubly activated bodies, in order
to make the transition the third-density body will go through the process of
what we call death. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The third and fourth, combination, density’s body will die
according to the necessity of third-density mind/body/spirit complex
distortions.
We may respond to the heart of your question by noting that the purpose of
such combined activation of mind/body/spirit complexes is that such
entities, to some extent, conscientiously are aware of those fourth-density
understandings which third-density is unable to remember due to the
forgetting. Thus fourth-density experience may be begun with the added
attraction to an entity oriented toward service-to-others of dwelling in a
troubled third-density environment and offering its love and compassion.
Questioner: Would the purpose in transitioning to Earth prior to the
complete changeover then be for the experience to be gained here before the
harvesting process?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. These entities are not Wanderers in the sense
that this planetary sphere is their fourth-density home planet. However, the
experience of this service is earned only by those harvested third-density
entities which have demonstrated a great deal of orientation towards service-
to-others. It is a privilege to be allowed this early an incarnation as there is
much experiential catalyst in service to other-selves at this harvesting.
Questioner: There are many children now who have demonstrated the
ability to bend metal mentally which is a fourth-density phenomenon.


                                      84
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

Would most of these children, then, be the type of entity of which we
speak?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is the reason that they can do this and the fifth-density
Wanderers who are here cannot do it the fact that they have the fourth-
density body in activation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Wanderers are third-density activated in
mind/body/spirit and are subject to the forgetting which can only be
penetrated with disciplined meditation and working.
Questioner: I am assuming that the reason for this is, first, since the entities
of harvestable third-density who very recently have been coming here are
coming here late enough so that they will not affect the polarization
through their teachings. They are not infringing upon the first distortion
because they are children now and they won’t be old enough to really affect
any of the polarization until the transition is well advanced. However, the
Wanderers who have come here are older and have a greater ability to affect
the polarization. They must do their affecting as a function of their ability
to penetrate the forgetting process in order to be within the first distortion.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: It would seem to me that some of the harvestable third-density
entities are, however, relatively old since I know of some individuals who
can bend metal who are over 50 years old and some others over 30. Would
there be other entities who could bend metal for other reasons than having
dual activated bodies?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Any entity who, by accident or by careful
design, penetrates intelligent energy’s gateway may use the shaping powers
of this energy.
Questioner: Now as this transition continues into fourth-density activation,
in order to inhabit this fourth-density sphere it will be necessary for all
third-density physical bodies to go through the process which we refer to as
death. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Are there any inhabitants at this time of this fourth-density
sphere who have already gone through this process. Is it now being
populated?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct only in the very, shall we say, recent past.
                                       85
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

Questioner: I would assume that this population is from other planets since
the harvesting has not yet occurred on this planet. It is from planets where
the harvesting has already occurred. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then are these entities visible to us? Could I see one of them?
Would he walk upon our surface?
Ra: I am Ra. We have discussed this. These entities are in dual bodies at this
time.
Questioner: Sorry that I am so stupid on this, but this particular concept is
very difficult for me to understand. It is something that I am afraid requires
some rather dumb questions on my part to fully understand, and I don’t
think I will ever fully understand it or even get a good grasp of it.
Then as the fourth-density sphere is activated there is heat energy being
generated. I assume that this heat energy is generated on the third-density
sphere only. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct. The experiential distortions of each
dimension are discrete.
Questioner: Then at some time in the future the fourth-density sphere will
be fully activated. What is the difference between full activation and partial
activation for this sphere?
Ra: I am Ra. At this time the cosmic influxes are conducive to true color
green core particles being formed and material of this nature thus being
formed. However, there is a mixture of the yellow-ray and green-ray
environments at this time necessitating the birthing of transitional
mind/body/spirit complex types of energy distortions. At full activation of
the true color green density of love the planetary sphere will be solid and
inhabitable upon its own and the birthing that takes place will have been
transformed through the process of time, shall we say, to the appropriate
type of vehicle to appreciate in full the fourth-density planetary
environment. At this nexus the green-ray environment exists to a far greater
extent in time/space than in space/time.
Questioner: Could you describe the difference that you are speaking of with
respect to time/space and space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. For the sake of your understanding we will use the working
definition of inner planes. There is a great deal of subtlety invested in this
sound vibration complex, but it, by itself, will perhaps fulfill your present
need.

                                       86
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

Questioner: I will make this statement and have you correct me. What we
have is, as our planet is spiraled by the spiraling action of the entire major
galaxy and our planetary system spirals into the new position, the fourth-
density vibrations becoming more and more pronounced. These atomic
core vibrations begin to create, more and more completely, the fourth-
density sphere and the fourth-density bodily complexes for inhabitation of
that sphere. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. To be corrected is the concept of the
creation of green-ray density bodily complexes. This creation will be gradual
and will take place beginning with your third-density type of physical
vehicle and, through the means of bisexual reproduction, become by
evolutionary processes, the fourth-density body complexes.
Questioner: Then are these entities of whom we have spoken, the third-
density harvestable who have been transferred, the ones who then will, by
bisexual reproduction, create the fourth-density complexes that are
necessary?
Ra: I am Ra. The influxes of true color green energy complexes will more
and more create the conditions in which the atomic structure of cells of
bodily complexes is that of the density of love. The mind/body/spirit
complexes inhabiting these physical vehicles will be, and to some extent,
are, those of whom you spoke and, as harvest is completed, the harvested
entities of this planetary influence.
Questioner: Is there a clock-like face, shall I say, associated with the entire
major galaxy so that as it revolves it carries all of these stars and planetary
systems through transitions from density to density? Is this how it works?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive. You may see a three-dimensional clock
face or spiral of endlessness which is planned by the Logos for this purpose.
Questioner: I understand that the Logos did not plan for the heating effect
in our third-density transition into fourth. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct except for the condition of free will which is, of
course, planned by the Logos as It, Itself, is a creature of free will. In this
climate an infinity of events or conditions may occur. They cannot be said
to be planned by the Logos but can be said to have been freely allowed.
Questioner: It would seem to me that the heating effect that takes place on
the planet is analogous to a disease in the body and would have as a root
cause the same or analogous mental configuration. Is this correct?



                                       87
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 63

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct except that the spiritual configuration as well as
mental biases of your peoples has been responsible for these distortions of
the body complex of your planetary sphere.
Questioner: When the third-density goes out of activation and into
potentiation that will leave us with a planet that is first, second, and fourth-
density. At that time there will be no activated third-density vibrations on
this planet. Am I correct in assuming that all third-density vibrations on
this planet now are those vibrations that compose the bodily complexes of
entities such as we are; that that is the sum total of third-density vibrations
on this planet at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working. This
instrument has energy left due to transfer but there is discomfort. We do
not wish to deplete this instrument. May we say that this instrument seems
in better configuration despite attack than previous workings.
To answer your query, this is incorrect only in that in addition to the
mind/body/spirit complexes of third-density there are the artifacts, thought-
forms, and feelings which these co-Creators have produced. This is third-
density.
May we answer any brief queries as we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. All is well. We leave you now, my
friends, in the glory of the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                       88
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 64
                              July 26, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first tell me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated with the exception of a transitory
distortion lessening the free flow of vital energy.
Questioner: Can you tell me what the transitory distortion is?
Ra: I am Ra. This is marginal information.
Questioner: Then we won’t question on it.
Could you explain the basic principles behind the ritual which we perform
to initiate the contact and what I would call the basic white magical
principles of protection?
Ra: I am Ra. Due to your avenue of question we perceive the
appropriateness of inclusion of the cause of this instrument’s transitory vital
energy distortion. The cause is a bias towards the yearning for expression of
devotion to the one Creator in group worship.
This entity was yearning for this protection both consciously in that it
responds to the accoutrements of this expression, the ritual, the colors and
their meanings as given by the distortion system of what you call the
church, the song of praise, and the combined prayers of thanksgiving and,
most of all, that which may be seen to be most centrally magical, the intake
of that food which is not of this dimension but has been transmuted into
metaphysical nourishment in what this distortion of expression calls the
holy communion.
The subconscious reason, it being the stronger for this yearning was the
awareness that such expression is, when appreciated by an entity as the
transmutation into the presence of the one Creator, a great protection of the
entity as it moves in the path of service-to-others.
The principle behind any ritual of the white magical nature is to so
configure the stimuli which reach down into the trunk of mind that this
arrangement causes the generation of disciplined and purified emotion or
love which then may be both protection and the key to the gateway to
intelligent infinity.


                                      89
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

Questioner: Can you tell me why the slight error made in the ritual starting
this communication two sessions ago allowed the intrusion by an Orion
affiliated entity?
Ra: I am Ra. This contact is narrow band and its preconditions precise. The
other-self offering its service in the negative path also is possessed of the skill
of the swordsman. You deal in this contact with, shall we say, forces of great
intensity poured into a vessel as delicate as a snowflake and as crystalline.
The smallest of lapses may disturb the regularity of this pattern of energies
which forms the channel for these transmissions.
We may note for your information that our pause was due to the necessity
of being quite sure that the mind/body/spirit complex of the instrument
was safely in the proper light configuration or density before we dealt with
the situation. Far better would it be to allow the shell to become unviable
than to allow the mind/body/spirit complex to be shall we say, misplaced.
Questioner: Could you describe or tell me of rituals or techniques used by
Ra in seeking in the direction of service?
Ra: I am Ra. To speak of that which sixth-density social memory complexes
labor within in order to advance is at best misprision of plain
communication for much is lost in transmission of concept from density to
density, and the discussion of sixth-density is inevitably distorted greatly.
However, we shall attempt to speak to your query for it is an helpful one in
that it allows us to express once again the total unity of creation. We seek
the Creator upon a level of shared experience to which you are not privy
and rather than surrounding ourselves in light we have become light. Our
understanding is that there is no other material except light. Our rituals, as
you may call them, are an infinitely subtle continuation of the balancing
processes which you are now beginning to experience.
We seek now without polarity. Thus we do not invoke any power from
without, for our search has become internalized as we become light/love and
love/light. These are the balances we seek, the balances between compassion
and wisdom which more and more allow our understanding of experience
to be informed that we may come closer to the unity with the one Creator
which we so joyfully seek.
Your rituals at your level of progress contain the concept of polarization and
this is most central at your particular space/time.
We may answer further if you have specific queries.



                                        90
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

Questioner: Would it be helpful if Ra were to describe the techniques that
Ra used while Ra was third-density to evolve in mind, body, and spirit?
Ra: I am Ra. This query lies beyond the Law of Confusion.
Questioner: What about fourth-density experience of Ra? Would that also
lie beyond the Law of Confusion?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Let us express a thought. Ra is not elite. To
speak of our specific experiences to a group which honors us is to guide to
the point of a specific advising. Our work was that of your people, of
experiencing the catalyst of joys and sorrows. Our circumstances were
somewhat more harmonious. Let it be said that any entity or group may
create the most splendid harmony in any outer atmosphere. Ra’s
experiences are no more than your own. Yours is the dance at this
space/time in third-density harvest.
Questioner: The question was brought up recently having to do with
possible records left near, in, or under the Great Pyramid at Giza. I have no
idea whether this would be of benefit. I will just ask if there is any benefit in
investigating in this area?
Ra: I am Ra. We apologize for seeming to be so shy of information.
However, any words upon this particular subject create the possibility of
infringement upon free will.
Questioner: In a previous session you mentioned the gateway of magic for
the adept occurring in eighteen-day cycles. Could you expand on that
information please?
Ra: I am Ra. The mind/body/spirit complex is born under a series of
influences, both lunar, planetary, cosmic, and in some cases, karmic. The
moment of the birthing into this illusion begins the cycles we have
mentioned.
The spiritual or adept’s cycle is an eighteen-day cycle and operates with the
qualities of the sine wave. Thus there are a few excellent days on the positive
side of the curve, that being the first nine days of the cycle—precisely the
fourth, the fifth, and the sixth—when workings are most appropriately
undertaken, given that the entity is still without total conscious control of
its mind/body/spirit distortion/reality.
The most interesting portion of this information, like that of each cycle, is
the noting of the critical point wherein passing from the ninth to the tenth
and from the eighteenth to the first days the adept will experience some
difficulty especially when there is a transition occurring in another cycle at
the same time. At the nadir of each cycle the adept will be at its least
                                       91
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

powerful but will not be open to difficulties in nearly the degree that it
experiences at critical times.
Questioner: Then to find the cycles we would take the instant of birth and
the emerging of the infant from the mother into this density and start the
cycle at that instant and continue it through the life. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is mostly correct. It is not necessary to identify the instant
of birthing. The diurnal cycle upon which this event occurs is satisfactory
for all but the most fine workings.
Questioner: Am I correct in assuming that whatever magic the adept would
perform at this time would be more successful or, shall we say, more to his
design than that performed at less opportune times in the cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. This cycle is an helpful tool to the adept but as we said, as the
adept becomes more balanced the workings designed will be dependent less
and less upon these cycles of opportunity and more and more even in their
efficacy.
Questioner: I have no ability to judge at what point the level of abilities of
the adept would be reached to be independent of this cyclical action. Can
you give me an indication of what level of “adeptness” that would be
necessary in order to be so independent?
Ra: I am Ra. We are fettered from speaking specifically due to this group’s
work, for to speak would seem to be to judge. However, we may say that
you may consider this cycle in the same light as the so-called astrological
balances within your group; that is, they are interesting but not critical.
Questioner: Thank you. I read that recent research has indicated that the
normal sleep cycle for entities on this planet occurs one hour later each
diurnal period so that we have a 25 hour cycle instead of a 24 hour cycle. Is
this correct, and if so, why is this?
Ra: I am Ra. This is in some cases correct. The planetary influences from
which those of Mars experience memory have some effect upon these third-
density physical bodily complexes. This race has given its genetic material to
many bodies upon your plane.
Questioner: Thank you. Ra mentioned the ones (name) and (name) in a
previous session. These are members of what we call our medical profession.
What is the value of modem medical techniques in alleviating bodily
distortions with respect to the purpose for these distortions and what we
might call karma?



                                      92
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

Ra: I am Ra. This query is convoluted. However, we shall make some
observations in lieu of attempting one coherent answer, for that which is
allopathic among your healing practices is somewhat two-sided.
Firstly, you must see the possibility/probability that each and every
allopathic healer is in fact an healer. Within your cultural nexus this
training is considered the appropriate means of perfecting the healing
ability. In the most basic sense any allopathic healer may be seen to,
perhaps, be one whose desire is service-to-others in alleviation of bodily
complex and mental/emotional complex distortions so that the entity to be
healed may experience further catalyst over a longer period of what you call
the life. This is a great service-to-others when appropriate due to the
accumulation of distortions toward wisdom and love which can be created
through the use of the space/time continuum of your illusion.
In observing the allopathic concept of the body complex as a machine we
may note the symptomology of a societal complex seemingly dedicated to
the most intransigent desire for the distortions of distraction, anonymity,
and sleep. This is the result rather than the cause of societal thinking upon
your plane.
In turn this mechanical concept of the body complex has created the
continuing proliferation of distortions towards what you would call ill-
health due to the strong chemicals used to control and hide bodily
distortions. There is a realization among many of your peoples that there
are more efficacious systems of healing not excluding the allopathic but also
including the many other avenues of healing.
Questioner: Let us assume that a bodily distortion occurs within a
particular entity who then has a choice of seeking allopathic aid or
experiencing the catalyst of the distortion and not seeking correction of the
distortion. Can you comment on the two possibilities for this entity and his
analysis of each path?
Ra: I am Ra. If the entity is polarized towards service-to-others, analysis
properly proceeds along the lines of consideration of which path offers the
most opportunity for service-to-others.
For the negatively polarized entity the antithesis is the case.
For the unpolarized entity the considerations are random and most likely in
the direction of the distortion towards comfort.
Questioner: I understand (name) brought a four-toed Bigfoot cast by here
the other day. Could you tell me which form of Bigfoot that cast was?
Ra: I am Ra. We can.
                                       93
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

Questioner: I know that it is totally unimportant, but as a service to (name)
I thought that I should ask that.
Ra: I am Ra. This entity was one of a small group of thought-forms.
Questioner: He also asked—I know this is also unimportant—why there
were no Bigfoot remains found after the entities have died on our surface.
Could you also answer this? I know this is of no importance but as a service
to him I ask it.
Ra: I am Ra. You may suggest that exploration of the caves which underlie
some of the western coastal mountain regions of your continent will one
day offer such remains. They will not be generally understood if this culture
survives in its present form long enough in your time measurement for this
probability/possibility vortex to occur.
There is enough energy for one more full query at this time.
Questioner: In the healing exercises, when you say examine the sensations
of the body, do you mean those sensations available to the body via the five
senses or in relation to the natural functions of the body such as touching,
loving, sexual sharing, and company, or are you speaking of something else
altogether?
Ra: I am Ra. The questioner may perceive its body complex at this
moment. It is experiencing sensations. Most of these sensations or in this
case, nearly all of them, are transient and without interest. However, the
body is the creature of the mind. Certain sensations carry importance due to
the charge or power which is felt by the mind upon the experience of this
sensation.
For instance, at this space/time nexus one sensation is carrying a powerful
charge and may be examined. This is the sensation of what you call the
distortion towards discomfort due to the cramped position of the body
complex during this working. In balancing you would then explore this
sensation. Why is this sensation powerful? Because it was chosen in order
that the entity might be of service-to-others in energizing this contact.
Each sensation that leaves the aftertaste of meaning upon the mind, that
leaves the taste within the memory shall be examined. These are the
sensations of which we speak.
May we answer any brief queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we could do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?


                                     94
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 64

Ra: I am Ra. Continue to consider the alignments. You are conscientious
and aware of the means of caring for the instrument in its present
distortions having to do with the wrists and hands. As always, love is the
greatest protection.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the glorious love and joyful light of the
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      95
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 65
                             August 8, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give us an indication of the instrument’s
condition and the level of vital and physical energies?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energies are as previously stated. The
physical energies are greatly distorted towards weakness at this space/time
due to the distortion complexes symptomatic of that which you call the
arthritic condition. The level of psychic attack is constant but is being dealt
with by this instrument in such a way as to eliminate serious difficulties due
to its fidelity and that of the support group.
Questioner: I may be recovering a little ground already covered today, but I
am trying to get a more clear picture of some things that I don’t understand
and possibly develop a plan of my own for activity in the future.
I have the impression that in the near future the seeking will increase by
many who now are incarnate in the physical on this planet. Their seeking
will increase because they will become more aware of the creation as it is
and as it is opposed, I might say, to the creation of man. Their orientation
and their thinking will be, by catalyst of a unique nature, reoriented to
thinking of more basic concepts, shall I say. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The generalities of expression can never be completely correct.
However, we may note that when faced with a hole in the curtain, an
entity’s eyes may well peer for the first time through the window beyond.
This tendency is probable given the possibility/probability vortices active
within your space/time and time/space continua at this nexus.
Questioner: I have assumed that the reason that so many Wanderers and
those harvested third-density entities who have been transferred here find it
a privilege and an exceptionally beneficial time to be incarnate upon this
planet is that the effect that I just spoke of gives them the opportunity to be
more fully of service because of the increased seeking. Is this, in general,
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is the intention which Wanderers had prior to
incarnation. There are many Wanderers whose dysfunction with regard to
the planetary ways of your peoples have caused, to some extent, a condition
of being caught up in a configuration of mind complex activity which, to
the corresponding extent, may prohibit the intended service.
                                      96
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

Questioner: I noticed that you are speaking more slowly than usual. Is there
a reason for this?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is somewhat weak and although strong in
vital energy and well able to function at this time is somewhat more fragile
than the usual condition we find. We may note a continuing bearing of the
physical distortion called pain which has a weakening effect upon physical
energy. In order to use the considerable store of available energy without
harming the instrument we are attempting to channel even more narrow
band than is our wont.
Questioner: Have I properly analyzed the condition that creates the
possibility of greater service as follows: Seniority by vibration of incarnation
has greatly polarized those upon the surface of the planet now, and the
influx of Wanderers has greatly increased the mental configuration toward
things of a more spiritual nature. This would be, I assume, one of the
factors creating a better atmosphere for service. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Would the coming changes as we progress into fourth-density
such as changes in the physical third-density planet due to the heating effect
and changes such as the ability of people to perform what we term
paranormal activities act as catalyst to create a greater seeking?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The paranormal events occurring are
not designed to increase seeking but are manifestations of those whose
vibratory configuration enables these entities to contact the gateway to
intelligent infinity. These entities capable of paranormal service may
determine to be of such service on a conscious level. This, however, is a
function of the entity and its free will and not the paranormal ability.
The correct portion of your statements is the greater opportunity for service
due to the many changes which will offer many challenges, difficulties, and
seeming distresses within your illusion to many who then will seek to
understand, if we may use this misnomer, the reason for the malfunctioning
of the physical rhythms of their planet.
Moreover, there exists probability/possibility vortices which spiral towards
your bellicose actions. Many of these vortices are not of the nuclear war but
of the less annihilatory but more lengthy so-called “conventional” war. This
situation, if formed in your illusion, would offer many opportunities for
seeking and for service.
Questioner: How would conventional warfare offer the opportunities for
seeking and service?

                                       97
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

Ra: I am Ra. The possibility/probabilities exist for situations in which great
portions of your continent and the globe in general might be involved in
the type of warfare which you might liken to guerrilla warfare. The ideal of
freedom from the so-called invading force of either the controlled fascism or
the equally controlled social common ownership of all things would
stimulate great quantities of contemplation upon the great polarization
implicit in the contrast between freedom and control. In this scenario which
is being considered at this time/space nexus the idea of obliterating valuable
sites and personnel would not be considered an useful one. Other weapons
would be used which do not destroy as your nuclear arms would. In this on-
going struggle the light of freedom would burn within the mind/body/spirit
complexes capable of such polarization. Lacking the opportunity for overt
expression of the love of freedom, the seeking for inner knowledge would
take root aided by those of the Brothers and Sisters of Sorrow which
remember their calling upon this sphere.
Questioner: We would seem to have dual catalysts operating, and the
question is which one is going to act first. The prophecies, I will call them,
made by Edgar Cayce indicated many Earth changes and I am wondering
about the mechanics describing the future. Ra, it has been stated, is not a
part of time and yet we concern ourselves with possibility/probability
vortices. It is very difficult for me to understand how the mechanism of
prophecy operates. What is the value of such a prophesy such as Cayce
made with respect to Earth changes and all of these scenarios?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider the shopper entering the store to purchase food with
which to furnish the table for the time period you call a week. Some stores
have some items, others a variant set of offerings. We speak of these
possibility/probability vortices when asked with the understanding that such
are as a can, jar, or portion of goods in your store.
It is unknown to us as we scan your time/space whether your peoples will
shop hither or yon. We can only name some of the items available for the
choosing. The, shall we say, record which the one you call Edgar read from
is useful in that same manner. There is less knowledge in this material of
other possibility/probability vortices and more attention paid to the
strongest vortex. We see the same vortex but also see many others. Edgar’s
material could be likened unto one hundred boxes of your cold cereal,
another vortex likened unto three, or six, or fifty of another product which
is eaten by your peoples for breakfast. That you will breakfast is close to
certain. The menu is your own choosing.
The value of prophecy must be realized to be only that of expressing
possibilities. Moreover, it must be, in our humble opinion, carefully taken

                                      98
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

into consideration that any time/space viewing, whether by one of your
time/space or by one such as we who view the time/space from a dimension,
shall we say, exterior to it will have a quite difficult time expressing time
measurement values. Thus prophesy given in specific terms is more
interesting for the content or type of possibility predicted than for the
space/time nexus of its supposed occurrence.
Questioner: So we have the distinct possibility of two different types of
catalyst creating an atmosphere of seeking that is greater than that which we
experience at present. There will be much confusion, especially in the
scenario of Earth changes simply because there have been many predictions
of these changes by many groups giving many and sundry reasons for the
changes. Can you comment on the effectiveness of this type of catalyst and
the rather wide pre-knowledge of the coming changes but also the wide
variation in explanation for these changes?
Ra: I am Ra. Given the amount of strength of the possibility/probability
vortex which posits the expression by the planet itself of the difficult
birthing of the planetary self into fourth-density, it would be greatly
surprising were not many which have some access to space/time able to
perceive this vortex. The amount of this cold cereal in the grocery, to use
our previous analogy, is disproportionately large. Each which prophesies
does so from an unique level, position, or vibratory configuration. Thus
biases and distortions will accompany much prophecy.
Questioner: This entire scenario for the next twenty years seems to be
aimed at producing an increase in seeking and an increase in the awareness
of the natural creation, but also a terrific amount of confusion. Was it the
preincarnative objective of many of the Wanderers to attempt to reduce this
confusion?
Ra: I am Ra. It was the aim of Wanderers to serve the entities of this planet
in whatever way was requested and it was also the aim of Wanderers that
their vibratory patterns might lighten the planetary vibration as a whole,
thus ameliorating the effects of planetary disharmony and palliating any
results of this disharmony.
Specific intentions such as aiding in a situation not yet manifest are not the
aim of Wanderers. Light and love go where they are sought and needed, and
their direction is not planned aforetimes.
Questioner: Then each of the Wanderers here acts as a function of the
biases he has developed in any way he sees fit to communicate or simply be
in his polarity to aid the total consciousness of the planet. Is there any
physical way in which he aids, perhaps by his vibrations somehow just

                                      99
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

adding to the planet just as electrical polarity or charging a battery? Does
that also aid the planet, just the physical presence of the Wanderers?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and the mechanism is precisely as you state. We
intended this meaning in the second portion of our previous answer.
You may, at this time, note that as with any entities, each Wanderer has its
unique abilities, biases, and specialities so that from each portion of each
density represented among the Wanderers come an array of preincarnative
talents which then may be expressed upon this plane which you now
experience so that each Wanderer, in offering itself before incarnation, has
some special service to offer in addition to the doubling effect of planetary
love and light and the basic function of serving as beacon or shepherd.
Thus there are those of fifth-density whose abilities to express wisdom are
great. There are fourth and sixth-density Wanderers whose ability to serve
as, shall we say, passive radiators or broadcasters of love and love/light are
immense. There are many others whose talents brought into this density are
quite varied.
Thus Wanderers have three basic functions once the forgetting is
penetrated, the first two being basic, the tertiary one being unique to that
particular mind/body/spirit complex.
We may note at this point while you ponder the possibility/probability
vortices that although you have many, many items which cause distress and
thus offer seeking and service opportunities, there is always one container in
that store of peace, love, light, and joy. This vortex may be very small, but
to turn one’s back upon it is to forget the infinite possibilities of the present
moment. Could your planet polarize towards harmony in one fine, strong,
moment of inspiration? Yes, my friends. It is not probable; but it is ever
possible.
Questioner: How common in the universe is a mixed harvest from a planet
of both positively and negatively oriented mind/body/spirit complexes?
Ra: I am Ra. Among planetary harvests which yield an harvest of
mind/body/spirit complexes approximately 10% are negative; approximately
60% are positive; and approximately 30% are mixed with nearly all harvest
being positive. In the event of mixed harvest it is almost unknown for the
majority of the harvest to be negative. When a planet moves strongly
towards the negative there is almost no opportunity for harvestable positive
polarization.
Questioner: Can you tell me why there is almost no opportunity in that
case?

                                      100
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

Ra: The ability to polarize positively requires a certain degree of self
determination.
Questioner: Then as these final days of the cycle transpire if the harvest
were to occur now, today, it would have a certain number harvested
positively and negatively and a certain number of repeaters. I am going to
assume that because of the catalyst that will be experienced between now
and the actual harvesting time these numbers of harvestable entities will
increase.
Generally speaking, not particularly with respect to this planet but with
respect to general experience in harvesting, how big an increase in
harvestable entities can you logically assume will occur because of the
catalyst that occurs in the final period such as this one, or am I making a
mistake in assuming that other planets have added catalyst at the end of a
harvesting period when they have a mixed harvest?
Ra: I am Ra. In the event of mixed harvest there is nearly always
disharmony and, therefore, added catalyst in the form of your so-called
“Earth changes.” In this assumption you are correct.
It is the Confederation’s desire to serve those who may indeed seek more
intensely because of this added catalyst. We do not choose to attempt to
project the success of added numbers to the harvest for this would not be
appropriate. We are servants. If we are called, we shall serve with all our
strength. To count the numbers is without virtue.
Questioner: Now the added catalyst at the end of the cycle is a function
specifically of the orientation of the consciousness that inhabits the planet.
The consciousness has provided the catalyst for itself in orienting its
thinking in the way it has oriented it, thus acting upon itself the same as
catalyst of bodily pain and disease act upon the single mind/body/spirit
complex. I made this analogy once before but reiterate it at this time to
clarify my own thinking in seeing the planetary entity as somewhat of a
single entity made up of billions of mind/body/spirit complexes. Is my
viewpoint correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are quite correct.
Questioner: Then we deal with an entity that has not yet formed a social
memory but is yet an entity just as one of us can be called a single entity.
Can we continue this observation of the conglomerate entity through the
galactic entity, or shall I say, planetary system type of entity? Let me try to
phrase it this way. Could I look at a single sun in its planetary system as an
entity and then look at a major galaxy with its billions of stars as an entity?
Can I continue this extrapolation in this way?
                                       101
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

Ra: I am Ra. You can but not within the framework of third-density
space/time.
Let us attempt to speak upon this interesting subject. In your space/time
you and your peoples are the parents of that which is in the womb. The
Earth, as you call it, is ready to be born and the delivery is not going
smoothly. When this entity has become born it will be instinct with the
social memory complex of its parents which have become fourth-density
positive. In this density there is a broader view.
You may begin to see your relationship to the Logos or sun with which you
are most intimately associated. This is not the relationship of parent to child
but of Creator, that is Logos, to Creator that is the mind/body/spirit
complex, as Logos. When this realization occurs you may then widen the
field of “eyeshot,” if you will, infinitely recognizing parts of the Logos
throughout the one infinite creation and feeling, with the roots of Mind
informing the intuition, the parents aiding their planets in evolution in
reaches vast and unknown in the creation, for this process occurs many,
many times in the evolution of the creation as an whole.
Questioner: The Wanderer goes through a forgetting process. You
mentioned that those who have both third-and fourth-density bodies
activated now do not have the forgetting that the Wanderer has. I was just
wondering if, say, a sixth-density Wanderer were here with a third-density
body activated, would he have gone through a forgetting that was in
sections, shall I say, a forgetting of fourth, fifth, and sixth-densities and if he
were to have his fourth-density body activated then he would have a partial
additional memory and then another partial memory if his fifth-density
body were activated and full memory if he had his sixth-density body
activated? Does this make any sense?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Thank you. The forgetting process was puzzling me because
you said that the fourth-density activated people who were here who had
been harvested did not have the same forgetting problem. Could you tell
me why the Wanderer loses his memory?
Ra: I am Ra. The reason is twofold. First, the genetic properties of the
connection between the mind/body/spirit complex and the cellular
structure of the body is different for third-density than for third/fourth-
density.
Secondly, the free will of third-density entities needs be preserved. Thus
Wanderers volunteer for third-density genetic or DNA connections to the
mind/body/spirit complex. The forgetting process can be penetrated to the
                                       102
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

extent of the Wanderer remembering what it is and why it is upon the
planetary sphere. However, it would be an infringement if Wanderers
penetrated the forgetting so far as to activate the more dense bodies and
thus be able to live, shall we say, in a god-like manner. This would not be
proper for those who have chosen to serve.
The new fourth-density entities which are becoming able to demonstrate
various newer abilities are doing so as a result of the present experience, not
as a result of memory. There are always a few exceptions, and we ask your
forgiveness for constant barrages of over-generalization.
Questioner: I don’t know if this question is related to what I am trying to
get at or not. I’ll ask it and see what results. You mentioned in speaking of
the pyramids the resonating chamber was used so that the adept could meet
the self. Would you explain what you meant by that?
Ra: I am Ra. One meets the self in the center or deeps of the being. The so-
called resonating chamber may be likened unto the symbology of the burial
and resurrection of the body wherein the entity dies to self and through this
confrontation of apparent loss and realization of essential gain, is
transmuted into a new and risen being.
Questioner: Could I make the analogy of in this apparent death of losing
the desires that are the illusory, common desires of third-density and
gaining desires of total service-to-others?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive. This was the purpose and intent of this
chamber as well as forming a necessary portion of the King’s Chamber
position’s effectiveness.
Questioner: Can you tell me what this chamber did to the entity to create
this awareness in him?
Ra: I am Ra. This chamber worked upon the mind and the body. The mind
was affected by sensory deprivation and the archetypical reactions to being
buried alive with no possibility of extricating the self. The body was affected
both by the mind configuration and by the electrical and piezoelectrical
properties of the materials which were used in the construction of the
resonating chamber.
This will be the last full query of this working. May we ask if there are any
brief queries at this time?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?



                                      103
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 65

Ra: I am Ra. We feel that the instrument is well supported and that all is
well. We caution each regarding this instrument’s distortions towards pain,
for it dislikes sharing these expressions but as support group this instrument
subconsciously accepts each entity’s aid. All is in alignment. You are
conscientious. We thank you for this. I am Ra. I leave you, my friends,
rejoicing in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth,
therefore, glorying in the power and in the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                     104
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 66
                            August 12, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: I would like to investigate the mechanism of healing using the
crystallized healer. I am going to make a statement, and I would appreciate
it if you would correct my thinking.
It seems to me that once the healer has become properly balanced and
unblocked with respect to energy centers, it is possible for him to act in
some way as a collector and focuser of light in a way analogous to the way a
pyramid works, collecting light through the left hand and emitting it
through the right; this then, somehow, penetrating the first and seventh
chakras’ vibratory envelop of the body and allowing for the realignment of
energy centers of the entity to be healed. I’m quite sure that I’m not
completely correct on this and possibly considerably off. Could you
rearrange my thinking so that it makes sense?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct in your assumption that the crystallized healer
is analogous to the pyramidal action of the King’s Chamber position. There
are a few adjustments we might suggest.
Firstly, the energy which is used is brought into the field complex of the
healer by the outstretched hand used in a polarized sense. However, this
energy circulates through the various points of energy to the base of the
spine and, to a certain extent, the feet, thus coming through the main
energy centers of the healer spiraling through the feet, turning at the red
energy center towards a spiral at the yellow energy center and passing
through the green energy center in a microcosm of the King’s Chamber
energy configuration of prana; this then continuing for the third spiral
through the blue energy center and being sent therefrom through the
gateway back to intelligent infinity.
It is from the green center that the healing prana moves into the polarized
healing right hand and therefrom to the one to be healed.
We may note that there are some who use the yellow-ray configuration to
transfer energy and this may be done but the effects are questionable and,
with regard to the relationship between the healer, the healing energy, and
the seeker, questionable due to the propensity for the seeker to continue
requiring such energy transfers without any true healing taking place in the


                                      105
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

absence of the healer due to the lack of penetration of the armoring shell of
which you spoke.
Questioner: A Wanderer who has an origin from fifth or sixth-density can
attempt such a healing and have little or no results. Can you tell me what
the Wanderer has lost and why it is necessary for him to regain certain
balances and abilities for him to perfect his healing ability?
Ra: I am Ra. You may see the Wanderer as the infant attempting to
verbalize the sound complexes of your peoples. The memory of the ability
to communicate is within the infant’s undeveloped mind complex, but the
ability to practice or manifest this called speech is not immediately
forthcoming due to the limitations of the mind/body/spirit complex it has
chosen to be a part of in this experience.
So it is with the Wanderer which, remembering the ease with which
adjustments can be made in the home density, yet still having entered third-
density, cannot manifest that memory due to the limitation of the chosen
experience. The chances of a Wanderer being able to heal in third-density
are only more than those native to this density because the desire to serve
may be stronger and this method of service chosen.
Questioner: What about the ones with the dual type of activated third and
fourth-density bodies, harvested from other third-density planets? Are they
able to heal using the techniques that we have discussed?
Ra: I am Ra. In many cases this is so, but as beginners of fourth-density, the
desire may not be present.
Questioner: I’m assuming, then, that we have a Wanderer with the desire
attempting to learn the techniques of healing while, shall I say, trapped in
third-density. He then, it seems to me, is primarily concerned with the
balancing and unblocking of the energy centers. Am I correct in this
assumption?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Only in so far as the healer has become
balanced may it be a channel for the balancing of an other-self. The healing
is first practiced upon the self, if we may say this, in another way.
Questioner: Now as the healer approaches an other-self to do the healing
we have a situation where the other-self has, through programming of
catalyst, possibly created a condition which is viewed as a condition needing
healing. What is the situation and what are the ramifications of the healer
acting upon the condition of programmed catalyst to bring about healing?
Am I correct in assuming that in doing this healing, the programmed
catalyst is useful to the one to be healed in that the one to be healed then

                                     106
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

becomes aware of what it wished to become aware of in programming the
catalyst? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your thinking cannot be said to be completely incorrect but
shows a rigidity which is not apparent in the flow of the experiential use of
catalyst.
The role of the healer is to offer an opportunity for realignment or aid in
realignment of either energy centers or some connection between the
energies of mind and body, spirit and mind, or spirit and body. This latter
is very rare.
The seeker will then have the reciprocal opportunity to accept a novel view
of the self, a variant arrangement of patterns of energy influx. If the entity,
at any level, desires to remain in the configuration of distortion which seems
to need healing it will do so. If, upon the other hand, the seeker chooses the
novel configuration, it is done through free will.
This is one great difficulty with other forms of energy transfer in that they
do not carry through the process of free will as this process is not native to
yellow-ray.
Questioner: What is the difference, philosophically, between a
mind/body/spirit complex healing itself through mental, shall I say,
configuration and it being healed by an healer?
Ra: I am Ra. You have a misconception. The healer does not heal. The
crystallized healer is a channel for intelligent energy which offers an
opportunity to an entity that it might heal itself.
In no case is there an other description of healing. Therefore, there is no
difference as long as the healer never approaches one whose request for aid
has not come to it previously. This is also true of the more conventional
healers of your culture and if these healers could but fully realize that they
are responsible only for offering the opportunity of healing, and not for the
healing, many of these entities would feel an enormous load of
misconceived responsibility fall from them.
Questioner: Then in seeking healing a mind/body/spirit complex would
then be seeking in some cases a source of gathered and focused light energy.
This source could be another mind/body/spirit complex sufficiently
crystallized for this purpose or the pyramid shape, or possibly something
else. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. These are some of the ways an entity may seek healing. Yes.
Questioner: Could you tell me the other ways an entity could seek healing?

                                      107
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps the greatest healer is within the self and may be
tapped with continued meditation as we have suggested.
The many forms of healing available to your peoples … each have virtue
and may be deemed appropriate by any seeker who wishes to alter the
physical complex distortions or some connection between the various
portions of the mind/body/spirit complex thereby.
Questioner: I have observed many activities known as psychic surgery in the
area of the Philippine Islands. It was my assumption that these healers are
providing what I would call a training aid or a way of creating a
reconfiguration of the mind of the patient to be healed as the relatively
naive patient observes the action of the healer in seeing the materialized
blood, etc. and reconfigures the roots of mind to believe, you might say, the
healing is done and, therefore, heals himself. Is this analysis that I have
made correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We may speak slightly further on the type of
opportunity.
There are times when the malcondition to be altered is without emotional,
mental, or spiritual interest to the entity and is merely that which has,
perhaps by chance genetic arrangement, occurred. In these cases that which
is apparently dematerialized will remain dematerialized and may be
observed as so by any observer. The malcondition which has an emotional,
mental, or spiritual charge is likely not to remain dematerialized in the sense
of the showing of the objective referent to an observer. However, if the
opportunity has been taken by the seeker the apparent malcondition of the
physical complex will be at variance with the actual health, as you call this
distortion, of the seeker and the lack of experiencing the distortions which
the objective referent would suggest still held sway.
For instance, in this instrument the removal of three small cysts was the
removal of material having no interest to the entity. Thus these growths
remained dematerialized after the so-called psychic surgery experience. In
other psychic surgery the kidneys of this instrument were carefully offered a
new configuration of being-ness which the entity embraced. However, this
particular portion of the mind/body/spirit complex carried a great deal of
emotional, mental, and spiritual charge due to this distorted functioning
being the cause of great illness in a certain configuration of events which
culminated in this entity’s conscious decision to be of service. Therefore,
any objective scanning of this entity’s renal complex would indicate the
rather extreme dysfunctional aspect which it showed previous to the psychic
surgery experience, as you call it.

                                     108
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

The key is not in the continuation of the dematerialization of distortion to
the eye of the beholder but rather lies in the choosing of the newly
materialized configuration which exists in time/space.
Questioner: Would you explain that last comment about the configuration
in time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. Healing is done in the time/space portion of the
mind/body/spirit complex, is adopted by the form-making or etheric body,
and is then given to the space/time physical illusion for use in the activated
yellow mind/body/spirit complex. It is the adoption of the configuration
which you call health by the etheric body in time/space which is the key to
what you call health, not any event which occurs in space/time. In the
process you may see the transdimensional aspect of what you call will, for it
is the will, the seeking, the desire of the entity which causes the indigo body
to use the novel configuration and to reform the body which exists in
space/time. This is done in an instant and may be said to operate without
regard to time. We may note that in the healing of very young children
there is often an apparent healing by the healer in which the young entity
has no part. This is never so, for the mind/body/spirit complex in
time/space is always capable of willing the distortions it chooses for
experience no matter what the apparent age, as you call it, of the entity.
Questioner: Is this desire and will that operates through to the time/space
section a function only of the entity who is healed or is it also the function
of the healer, the crystallized healer?
Ra: I am Ra. May we take this opportunity to say that this is the activity of
the Creator. To specifically answer your query the crystallized healer has no
will. It offers an opportunity without attachment to the outcome, for it is
aware that all is one and that the Creator is knowing Itself.
Questioner: Then the desire must be strong in the mind/body/spirit
complex who seeks healing to be healed in order for the healing to occur? Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct on one level or another. An entity may not
consciously seek healing and yet subconsciously be aware of the need to
experience the new set of distortions which result from healing. Similarly an
entity may consciously desire healing greatly but within the being, at some
level, find some cause whereby certain configurations which seem quite
distorted are, in fact, at that level, considered appropriate.
Questioner: I assume that the reason for assuming the distortions
appropriate would be that these distortions would aid the entity in its

                                      109
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

reaching its ultimate objective which is a movement along the path of
evolution in the desired polarity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then an entity who becomes aware of his polarization with
respect to service-to-others might find a paradoxical situation in the case
where it was unable to fully serve because of distortions chosen to reach the
understanding it has reached. At this point it would seem that the entity
who was aware of the mechanism might, through meditation, understand
the necessary mental configuration for alleviating the physical distortion so
that it could be of greater service-to-others. At this particular nexus am I
correct in this thinking?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct although we might note that there are often
complex reasons for the programming of a distorted physical complex
pattern. In any case, meditation is always an aid to knowing the self.
Questioner: Is a vertical positioning of the spine useful or helpful in the
meditative procedure?
Ra: I am Ra. It is somewhat helpful.
Questioner: Would you please list the polarities within the body which are
related to the balancing of the energy centers of the various bodies of the
unmanifested entity?
Ra: I am Ra. In this question there lies a great deal of thought which we
appreciate. It is possible that the question itself may serve to aid meditations
upon this particular subject. Each unmanifested self is unique. The basic
polarities have to do with the balanced vibratory rates and relationships
between the first three energy centers and to a lesser extent, each of the
other energy centers?
May we answer more specifically?
Questioner: Possibly in the next session we will expand on that.
I would like to ask the second question. What are the structure and
contents of the archetypical mind, and how does the archetypical mind
function in informing the intuition and conscious mind of an individual
mind/body/spirit complex.
Ra: I am Ra. You must realize that we offered these concepts to you so that
you might grow in your own knowledge of the self through the
consideration of them. We would prefer, especially for this latter query, to
listen to the observations upon this subject which the student of these

                                       110
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

exercises may make and then suggest further avenues of the refinement of
these inquiries. We feel we might be of more aid in this way.
Questioner: You mentioned that an energizing spiral is emitted from the
top of any pyramid and that you could benefit by placing this under the
head for a period of thirty minutes or less. Can you tell me how this third
spiral is helpful and what help it gives the entity who is receiving it?
Ra: I am Ra. There are substances which you may ingest which cause the
physical vehicle to experience distortions towards an increase of energy.
These substances are crude, working rather roughly upon the body complex
increasing the flow of adrenaline.
The vibration offered by the energizing spiral of the pyramid is such that
each cell, both in space/time and in time/space, is charged as if hooked to
your electricity. The keenness of mind, the physical and sexual energy of
body, and the attunement of will of spirit are all touched by this energizing
influence. It may be used in any of these ways. It is possible to over-charge a
battery, and this is the cause of our cautioning any who use such pyramidal
energies to remove the pyramid after a charge has been received.
Questioner: Is there a best material or an optimal size for this small
pyramid to go beneath the head?
Ra: I am Ra. Given that the proportions are such as to develop the spirals in
the Giza pyramid, the most appropriate size for use beneath the head is an
overall height small enough to make placing it under the cushion of the
head a comfortable thing.
Questioner: There’s no best material?
Ra: I am Ra. There are better materials which are, in your system of barter,
quite dear. They are not that much better than substances which we have
mentioned before. The only incorrect substances would be the baser metals.
Questioner: You mentioned the problems with the action in the King’s
Chamber of the Giza-type pyramid. I am assuming if we used the same
geometrical configuration that is used in the pyramid at Giza this would be
perfectly all right for the pyramid placed beneath the head since we
wouldn’t be using the King’s Chamber radiations but only the third spiral
from the top, and I’m also asking if it would be better to use a 60° apex
angle than the larger apex angle? Would it provide a better energy source?
Ra: I am Ra. For energy through the apex angle the Giza pyramid offers an
excellent model. Simply be sure the pyramid is so small that there is no
entity small enough to crawl inside it.

                                      111
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

Questioner: I assume that this energy then, this spiraling light energy, is
somehow absorbed by the energy field of the body. Is this somehow
connected to the indigo energy center? Am I correct in this guess?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The properties of this energy are such as to
move within the field of the physical complex and irradiate each cell of the
space/time body and, as this is done, irradiate also the time/space equivalent
which is closely aligned with the space/time yellow-ray body. This is not a
function of the etheric body or of free will. This is a radiation much like
your sun’s rays. Thus it should be used with care.
Questioner: How many applications of thirty minutes or less during a
diurnal time period would be appropriate?
Ra: I am Ra. In most cases, no more than one. In a few cases, especially
where the energy will be used for spiritual work, experimentation with two
shorter periods might be possible, but any feeling of sudden weariness
would be a sure sign that the entity had been over-radiated.
Questioner: Can this energy help in any way as far as healing of physical
distortions?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no application for direct healing using this energy
although, if used in conjunction with meditation, it may offer to a certain
percentage of entities some aid in meditation. In most cases it is most
helpful in alleviating weariness and in the stimulation of physical or sexual
activity.
Questioner: In a transition from third to fourth-density we have two other
possibilities other than the type that we are experiencing now. We have the
possibility of a totally positively polarized harvest and the possibility of a
totally negatively polarized harvest that I understand have occurred
elsewhere in the universe many times. When there is a totally negatively
polarized harvest, the whole planet that has negatively polarized makes the
transition from third to fourth-density. Does the planet have the experience
of the distortion of disease that this planet now experiences prior to that
transition?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive. The negative harvest is one of intense
disharmony and the planet will express this.
Questioner: The planet has a certain set of conditions in late third-density,
and then the conditions are different in early fourth-density. Could you give
me an example of a negatively polarized planet and the conditions in late
third-density and early fourth-density so that I can see how they change?


                                      112
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

Ra: I am Ra. The vibrations from third to fourth-density change on a
negatively oriented planet precisely as they do upon a positively oriented
planet. With fourth-density negative comes many abilities and possibilities
of which you are familiar. The fourth-density is more dense and it is far
more difficult to hide the true vibrations of the mind/body/spirit complex.
This enables fourth-density negatives, as well as positives, the chance to
form social memory complexes. It enables negatively oriented entities the
opportunity for a different set of parameters with which to show their
power over others and to be of service to the self. The conditions are the
same as far as the vibrations are concerned.
Questioner: I was concerned about the amount of physical distortions,
disease, and that sort of thing in third-density negative just before
harvesting and in fourth-density negative just after harvesting or in
transition. What are the conditions of the physical problems, disease, etc. in
late third-density negative?
Ra: I am Ra. Each planetary experience is unique. The problems, shall we
say, of bellicose actions are more likely to be of pressing concern to late
third-density negative entities than the earth’s reactions to negativity of the
planetary mind, for it is often by such warlike attitudes on a global scale
that the necessary negative polarization is achieved.
As fourth-density occurs there is a new planet and new physical vehicle
system gradually expressing itself and the parameters of bellicose actions
become those of thought rather than manifested weapons.
Questioner: Well then is physical disease and illness as we know it on this
planet rather widespread on a third-density negative planet before harvest
into fourth-density negative?
Ra: I am Ra. Physical complex distortions of which you speak are likely to
be less found as fourth-density negative begins to be a probable choice of
harvest due to the extreme interest in the self which characterizes the
harvestable third-density negative entity. Much more care is taken of the
physical body as well as much more discipline being offered to the self
mentally. This is an orientation of great self-interest and self-discipline.
There are still instances of the types of disease which are associated with the
mind complex distortions of negative emotions such as anger. However, in
an harvestable entity these emotional distortions are much more likely to be
used as catalyst in an expressive and destructive sense as regards the object of
anger.
Questioner: I am trying to understand the way that disease and bodily
distortions are generated with respect to polarities, both positive and

                                      113
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

negative. It seems that they are generated in some way to create the split of
polarization, that they have a function in creating the original polarization
that occurs in third-density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not precisely correct. Distortions of the bodily or
mental complex are those distortions found in beings which have need of
experiences which aid in polarization. These polarizations may be those of
entities which have already chosen the path or polarization to be followed.
It is more likely for positively oriented individuals to be experiencing
distortions within the physical complex due to the lack of consuming
interest in the self and the emphasis on service-to-others. Moreover, in an
unpolarized entity catalyst of the physical distortion nature will be
generated at random. The hopeful result is, as you say, the original choice of
polarity. Oftentimes this choice is not made but the catalyst continues to be
generated. In the negatively oriented individual the physical body is likely to
be more carefully tended and the mind disciplined against physical
distortion.
Questioner: This planet, to me, seems to be what I would call a cesspool of
distortions. This includes all diseases and malfunctions of the physical body
in general. It would seem to me that, on the average, this planet would be
very, very high on the list if we just took the overall amount of these
problems. Am I correct in this assumption?
Ra: I am Ra. We will review previous material.
Catalyst is offered to the entity. If it is not used by the mind complex it will
then filter through to the body complex and manifest as some form of
physical distortion. The more efficient the use of catalyst, the less physical
distortion to be found.
There are, in the case of those you call Wanderers, not only a congenital
difficulty in dealing with the third-density vibratory patterns but also a
recollection, however dim, that these distortions are not necessary or usual
in the home vibration.
We over-generalize as always, for there are many cases of preincarnative
decisions which result in physical or mental limitations and distortions, but
we feel that you are addressing the question of widespread distortions
towards misery of one form or another. Indeed, on some third-density
planetary spheres catalyst has been used more efficiently. In the case of your
planetary sphere there is much inefficient use of catalyst and, therefore,
much physical distortion.
We have enough energy available for one query at this time.

                                      114
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 66

Questioner: Then I will ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue as always in love. All is well. You are conscientious.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                      115
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 67
                             August 15, 1981
Ra: I am Ra and I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first give us the instrument’s condition, please?
Ra: I am Ra. The vital energies are more closely aligned with the amount of
distortion normal to this entity than previous asking showed. The physical
complex energy levels are somewhat less strong than at the previous asking.
The psychic attack component is exceptionally strong at this particular
nexus.
Questioner: Can you describe what you call the psychic attack component
and tell me why it is strong at this particular time?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall elect not to retrace previously given information but
rather elect to note that the psychic attack upon this instrument is at a
constant level as long as it continues in this particular service.
Variations towards the distortion of intensity of attack occur due to the
opportunities presented by the entity in any weakness. At this particular
nexus the entity has been dealing with the distortion which you call pain for
some time, as you call this measurement, and this has a cumulatively
weakening effect upon physical energy levels. This creates a particularly
favorable target of opportunity, and the entity of which we have previously
spoken has taken this opportunity to attempt to be of service in its own
way. It is fortunate for the on-going vitality of this contact that the
instrument is a strong-willed entity with little tendency towards the
distortion, called among your peoples, hysteria, since the dizzying effects of
this attack have been constant and at times disruptive for several of your
diurnal periods.
However, this particular entity is adapting well to the situation without
undue distortions towards fear. Thus the psychic attack is not successful but
does have some draining influence upon the instrument.
Questioner: I will ask if I am correct in this analysis. We would consider
that the entity making this so-called attack is offering its service with respect
to its distortion in our polarized condition now so that we may more fully
appreciate its polarity, and we are appreciative of the fact and thank this
entity for its attempt to serve our one Creator in bringing to us knowledge
in, shall I say, a more complete sense. Is this correct?

                                       116
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

Ra: I am Ra. There is no correctness or incorrectness to your statement. It is
an expression of a positively polarized and balanced view of negatively
polarized actions which has the effect of debilitating the strength of the
negatively polarized actions.
Questioner: We would welcome the services of the entity who uses, and I
will use the misnomer attack, since I do not consider this an attack but an
offering of service, and we welcome this offering of service, but we would be
able, I believe, to make more full use of the services if they were not
physically disabling the instrument in a minor way. For with a greater
physical ability she would be able to more appreciate the service. We would
greatly appreciate it if the service was carried on in some manner which we
could welcome in even greater love than at present. This, I assume, would
be some service that would not include the dizzying effect.
I am trying to understand the mechanism of this service of the entity that
seems to be constantly with us, and I am trying to understand the origin of
this entity and his mechanism of greeting us. I will make a statement that
will probably be incorrect but is a function of my extreme limitation in
understanding the other densities and how they work. I am guessing that
this particular entity is a member of the Orion Confederation and is
possibly incarnate in a body of the appropriate density, which I assume is
the fifth, and by mental discipline he has been able to project a portion or
all of his consciousness to our coordinates, you might say, here and it is
possibly one of the seven bodies that make up his mind/body/spirit
complex. Is any of this correct, and can you tell me what is correct or
incorrect about this statement?
Ra: I am Ra. The statement is substantially correct.
Questioner: Would you rather not give me information as to the specifics
of my statement?
Ra: I am Ra. We did not perceive a query in further detail. Please
requestion.
Questioner: Which body in respect to the colors does the entity use to
travel to us?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is not particularly simple to answer due to the
transdimensional nature, not only of space/time to time/space, but from
density to density. The time/space light or fifth-density body is used while
the space/time fifth-density body remains in fifth-density. The assumption
that the consciousness is projected thereby is correct. The assumption that
this conscious vehicle attached to the space/time fifth-density physical
complex is that vehicle which works in this particular service is correct.
                                     117
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

Questioner: I undoubtedly will ask several uninformed questions. However,
I was trying to understand certain concepts that have to do with the
illusion, I shall say, of polarization that seems to exist at certain density
levels in the creation and how the mechanism of the interaction of
consciousness works. It seems to me that the fifth-density entity is attracted
in some way to our group by the polarization of this group which acts
somehow as a beacon to this entity. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is, in substance, correct but the efforts of this entity are
put forward only reluctantly. The usual attempts upon positively oriented
entities or groups of entities are made, as we have said, by minions of the
fifth-density Orion leaders; these are fourth-density. The normal gambit of
such fourth-density attack is the tempting of the entity or group of entities
away from total polarization towards service-to-others and toward the
aggrandizement of self or of social organizations with which the self
identifies. In the case of this particular group each was given a full range of
temptations to cease being of service to each other and to the one infinite
Creator. Each entity declined these choices and instead continued with no
significant deviation from the desire for a purely other-self service
orientation. At this point one of the fifth-density entities over-seeing such
detuning processes determined that it would be necessary to terminate the
group by what you might call magical means, as you understand ritual
magic. We have previously discussed the potential for the removal of one of
this group by such attack and have noted that by far the most vulnerable is
the instrument due to its preincarnative physical complex distortions.
Questioner: In order for this group to remain fully in service to the Creator,
since we recognize this fifth-density entity as the Creator, we must also
attempt to serve in any way we can, this entity. Is it possible for you to
communicate to us the desires of this entity if there are any in addition to
us simply ceasing the reception and dissemination of that which you
provide?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity has two desires. The first and foremost is to, shall
we say, misplace one or more of this group in a negative orientation so that
it may choose to be of service along the path of service to self. The objective
which must precede this is the termination of the physical complex viability
of one of this group while the mind/body/spirit complex is within a
controllable configuration. May we say that although we of Ra have limited
understanding, it is our belief that sending this entity love and light, which
each of the group is doing, is the most helpful catalyst which the group may
offer to this entity.
Questioner: We find a—I’m sorry. Please continue.

                                      118
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

Ra: I am Ra. We were about to note that this entity has been as neutralized
as possible in our estimation by this love offering and thus its continued
presence is perhaps the understandable limit for each polarity of the various
views of service which each may render to the other.
Questioner: We have a paradoxical situation with respect to serving the
Creator. We have requests, from those whom we serve in this density, for
Ra’s information. However, we have requests from another density not to
disseminate this information. We have portions of the Creator requesting
two seemingly opposite activities of this group. It would be very helpful if
we could reach the condition of full service in such a way that we were by
every thought and activity serving the Creator to the very best of our ability.
Is it possible for you to solve, or for the fifth-density entity who offers its
service to solve, this paradox which I have observed?
Ra: I am Ra. It is quite possible.
Questioner: Then how could we solve this paradox?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider, if you will, that you have no ability not to serve the
Creator since all is the Creator. You do not have merely two opposite
requests for information or lack of information from this source if you listen
careful to those whose voices you may hear. This is all one voice to which
you resonate upon a certain frequency. This frequency determines your
choice of service to the one Creator. As it happens this group’s vibratory
patterns and those of Ra are compatible and enable us to speak through this
instrument with your support. This is a function of free will.
A portion, seemingly of the Creator, rejoices at your choice to question us
regarding the evolution of spirit. A seemingly separate portion would wish
for multitudinous answers to a great range of queries of a specific nature.
Another seemingly separate group of your peoples would wish this
correspondence through this instrument to cease, feeling it to be of a
negative nature. Upon the many other planes of existence there are those
whose every fiber rejoices at your service and those such as the entity of
whom you have been speaking which wish only to terminate the life upon
the third-density plane of this instrument. All are the Creator. There is one
vast panoply of biases and distortions, colors and hues, in an unending
pattern. In the case of those with whom you, as entities and as a group, are
not in resonance, you wish them love, light, peace, joy, and bid them well.
No more than this can you do for your portion of the Creator is as it is and
your experience and offering of experience, to be valuable, needs be more
and more a perfect representation of who you truly are. Could you, then,
serve a negative entity by offering the instrument’s life? It is unlikely that
you would find this a true service. Thus you may see in many cases the
                                      119
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

loving balance being achieved, the love being offered, light being sent, and
the service of the service-to-self oriented entity gratefully acknowledged
while being rejected as not being useful in your journey at this time. Thus
you serve one Creator without paradox.
Questioner: This particular entity, by his service, is able to create a dizzying
effect on the instrument. Could you describe the mechanics of such a
service?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument, in the small times of its incarnation, had the
distortion in the area of the otic complex of many infections which caused
great difficulties at this small age, as you would call it. The scars of these
distortions remain and indeed that which you call the sinus system remains
distorted. Thus the entity works with these distortions to produce a loss of
the balance and a slight lack of ability to use the optic apparatus.
Questioner: I was wondering about the magical, shall I say, principles used
by the fifth-density entity giving this service and his ability to give it. Why
is he able to utilize these particular physical distortions from the
philosophical or magical point of view?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity is able to, shall we say, penetrate in time/space
configuration the field of this particular entity. It has moved through the
quarantine without any vehicle and thus has been more able to escape
detection by the net of the Guardians.
This is the great virtue of the magical working whereby consciousness is sent
forth essentially without vehicle as light. The light would work instantly
upon an untuned individual by suggestion, that is the stepping out in front
of the traffic because the suggestion is that there is no traffic. This entity, as
each in this group, is enough disciplined in the ways of love and light that it
is not suggestible to any great extent. However, there is a predisposition of
the physical complex which this entity is making maximal use of as regards
the instrument, hoping for instance, by means of increasing dizziness, to
cause the instrument to fall or to indeed walk in front of your traffic
because of impaired vision.
The magical principles, shall we say, may be loosely translated into your
system of magic whereby symbols are used and traced and visualized in
order to develop the power of the light.
Questioner: Do you mean then that this fifth-density entity visualizes
certain symbols? I am assuming that these symbols are of a nature where
their continued use would have some power or charge. Am I correct?



                                       120
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

Ra: I am Ra. You are correct. In fifth-density light is as visible a tool as your
pencil’s writing.
Questioner: Then am I correct in assuming that this entity configures the
light into symbology, that is what we would call a physical presence? Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The light is used to create a sufficient purity
of environment for the entity to place its consciousness in a carefully created
light vehicle which then uses the tools of light to do its working. The will
and presence are those of the entity doing the working.
Questioner: The fifth-density entity you mentioned penetrated the
quarantine. Was this done through one of the windows or was this because
of his, shall I say, magical ability?
Ra: I am Ra. This was done through a very slight window which less
magically oriented entities or groups could not have used to advantage.
Questioner: The main point with this line of questioning has to do with the
first distortion and the fact that this window exists. Was this a portion of
the random effect and are we experiencing the same type of balancing in
receiving the offerings of this entity as the planet in general receives because
of the window effect?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct. As the planetary sphere accepts more
highly evolved positive entities or groups with information to offer, the
same opportunity must be offered to similarly wise negatively oriented
entities or groups.
Questioner: Then we experience in this seeming difficulty the wisdom of
the first distortion and for that reason must fully accept that which we
experience. This is my personal view. Is it congruent with Ra’s?
Ra: I am Ra. In our view we would perhaps go further in expressing
appreciation of this opportunity. This is an intensive opportunity in that it
is quite marked in its effects, both actual and potential, and as it affects the
instrument’s distortions towards pain and other difficulties such as the
dizziness, it enables the instrument to continuously choose to serve others
and to serve the Creator.
Similarly it offers a continual opportunity for each in the group to express
support under more distorted or difficult circumstances of the other-self
experiencing the brunt, shall we say, of this attack, thus being able to
demonstrate the love and light of the infinite Creator and, furthermore,
choosing working by working to continue to serve as messengers for this
information which we attempt to offer and to serve the Creator thereby.
                                       121
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

Thus the opportunities are quite noticeable as well as the distortions caused
by this circumstance.
Questioner: Thank you. Is this so-called attack offered to myself and
(name) as well as the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct
Questioner: I personally have felt no effect that I am aware of. Is it possible
for you to tell me how we are offered this service?
Ra: I am Ra. The questioner has been offered the service of doubting the
self and of becoming disheartened over various distortions of the personal
nature. This entity has not chosen to use these opportunities and the Orion
entity has basically ceased to be interested in maintaining constant
surveillance of this entity.
The scribe is under constant surveillance and has been offered numerous
opportunities for the intensification of the mental/emotional distortions
and in some cases the connection matrices between mental/emotional
complexes and the physical complex counterpart. As this entity has become
aware of these attacks it has become much less pervious to them. This is the
particular cause of the great intensification and constancy of the surveillance
of the instrument, for it is the weak link due to factors beyond its control
within this incarnation.
Questioner: Is it within the first distortion to tell me why the instrument
experienced so many physical distortions during the new times of its
physical incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: In that case can you answer me as to why the instrument
experienced so much during its early years?
Ra: I am Ra. We were affirming the correctness of your assumption that
such answers would be breaking the Way of Confusion. It is not
appropriate for such answers to be laid out as a table spread for dinner. It is
appropriate that the complexes of opportunity involved be contemplated.
Questioner: Then there is no other service at this time that we can offer
that fifth-density entity of the Orion group who is constantly with us. As I
see it now from your point of view there is nothing that we can do for him?
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. There is great humor in your attempt to be of
polarized service to the opposite polarity. There is a natural difficulty in
doing so since what you consider service is considered by this entity non-
                                      122
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

service. As you send this entity love and light and wish it well it loses its
polarity and needs to regroup.
Thus it would not consider your service as such. On the other hand, if you
allowed it to be of service by removing this instrument from your midst you
might perhaps perceive this as not being of service. You have here a
balanced and polarized view of the Creator; two services offered, mutually
rejected, and in a state of equilibrium in which free will is preserved and
each allowed to go upon its own path of experiencing the one infinite
Creator.
Questioner: Thank you. In closing that part of the discussion I would just
say that if there is anything that we can do that is within our ability—and I
understand that there are many things such as the ones that you just
mentioned that are not within our ability—that we could do for this
particular entity, if you would in the future communicate its requests to us
we will at least consider them because we would like to serve in every
respect. Is this agreeable to you?
Ra: I am Ra. We perceive that we have not been able to clarify your service
versus its desire for service. You need, in our humble opinion, to look at the
humor of the situation and relinquish your desire to serve where no service
is requested. The magnet will attract or repel. Glory in the strength of your
polarization and allow others of opposite polarity to similarly do so, seeing
the great humor of this polarity and its complications in view of the
unification in sixth-density of these two paths.
Questioner: Thank you very much. I have a statement here that I will have
you comment on for accuracy or inaccuracy. In general, the archetypical
mind is a representation of facets of the One Infinite Creation. The Father
archetype corresponds to the male or positive aspect of electromagnetic
energy and is active, creative, and radiant as is our local sun. The Mother
archetype corresponds to the female or negative aspect of electromagnetic
energy and is receptive or magnetic as is our Earth as it receives the sun’s
rays and brings forth life via third-density fertility. The Prodigal Son or the
Fool archetype corresponds to every entity who seems to have strayed from
unity and seeks to return to the one infinite Creator. The Devil archetype
represents the illusion of the material world and the appearance of evil but
is more accurately the provider of catalyst for the growth of each entity
within the third-density illusion. The Magician, Saint, Healer, or Adept
corresponds to the higher self and, because of the balance within its energy
centers, pierces the illusion to contact intelligent infinity and thereby
demonstrates mastery of the catalyst of third-density. The archetype of
Death symbolizes the transition of an entity from the yellow-ray body to the

                                       123
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

green-ray body either temporarily between incarnations or, more
permanently, at harvest.
Each archetype presents an aspect of the One Infinite Creation to teach the
individual mind/body/spirit complex according to the calling or the
electromagnetic configuration of mind of the entity. Teaching is done via
the intuition. With the proper seeking or mind configuration, the power of
will uses the spirit as a shuttle to contact the appropriate archetypical aspect
necessary for the teach/learning. In the same way each of the other
informers of intuition are contacted. They are hierarchical and proceed
from the entity’s own subconscious mind to group or planetary mind, to
guides, to higher self, to archetypical mind, to cosmic mind or intelligent
infinity. Each is contacted by the spirit serving as shuttle according to the
harmonized electromagnetic configuration of the seeker’s mind and the
information sought.
Would you please comment on the accuracy of these observations and
correct any errors and fill in any omissions?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity has been using transferred energy for most of this
session due to its depleted physical levels. We shall begin this rather
complex answer which is interesting but do not expect to finish it. Those
portions which we do not respond to we ask that you requestion us on at a
working in your future.
Questioner: Perhaps it would be better to start the next session with the
answer to this question. Would that be appropriate or is the energy already
fixed?
Ra: I am Ra. The energy is as always allotted. The choice, as always, is
yours.
Questioner: In that case, continue.
Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps the first item we shall address is the concept of the
spirit used as a shuttle between the roots and the trunk of mind. This is a
misapprehension and we shall allow the questioner to consider the function
of the spirit further, for in working with the mind we are working within
one complex and have not yet attempted to penetrate intelligent infinity. It
is well said that archetypes are portions of the one infinite Creator or aspects
of its face. It is, however, far better to realize that the archetypes, while
constant in the complex of generative energies offered, do not give the same
yield of these complexes to any two seekers. Each seeker will experience each
archetype in the characteristics within the complex of the archetype which
are most important to it. An example of this would be the observation of
the questioner that the Fool is described in such and such a way. One great
                                      124
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 67

aspect of this archetype is the aspect of faith, the walking into space without
regard for what is to come next. This is, of course, foolish but is part of the
characteristic of the spiritual neophyte. That this aspect was not seen may
be pondered by the questioner. At this time we shall again request that the
query be restated at the next working and we shall at this time cease using
this instrument. Before we leave may we ask if there may be any short
questions?
Questioner: Only if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue, my friends, in the strength of harmony, love, and
light. All is well. The alignments are appreciated for their careful placement.
I am Ra. I leave you now, my friends, in the glory of the love and the light
of the infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace
of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      125
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 68
                             August 18, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: The primary reason that we decided to have this session today
is that I might not be around for a while and I had a pressing question
about what happened Sunday night when, apparently, the instrument was
slipping into a trance state during one of the normal Sunday night
meditations, and I would like to question you on this. Can you give me
information about what happened?
Ra: I am Ra. We can.
Questioner: Would you tell me what happened in that case?
Ra: I am Ra. We have instructed this instrument to refrain from calling us
unless it is within this set of circumscribed circumstances. In the event of
which you speak this instrument was asked a question which pertained to
what you have been calling the Ra Material. This instrument was providing
the voice for our brothers and sisters of the wisdom density known to you as
Latwii.
This instrument thought to itself, “I do not know this answer. I wish I were
channeling Ra.” The ones of Latwii found themselves in the position of
being approached by the Orion entity which seeks to be of service in its
own way. The instrument began to prepare for Ra contact. Latwii knew
that if this was completed the Orion entity would have an opportunity
which Latwii wished to avoid.
It is fortunate for this instrument, firstly, that Latwii is of fifth-density and
able to deal with that particular vibratory complex which the Orion entity
was manifesting and, secondly, that there were those in the support group at
that time which sent great amounts of support to the instrument in this
crux. Thus what occurred was the ones of Latwii never let go of this
instrument although this came perilously close to breaking the Way of
Confusion. It continued to hold its connection with the mind/body/spirit
complex of the instrument and to generate information through it even as
the instrument began to slip out of its physical vehicle.
The act of continued communication caused the entity to be unable to
grasp the instrument’s mind/body/spirit complex and after but a small
measure of your space/time Latwii recovered the now completely

                                      126
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 68

amalgamated instrument and gave it continued communication to steady it
during the transition back into integration.
Questioner: Could you tell me what the plan of the fifth-density negatively
oriented entity was and how it would have accomplished it and what the
results would have been if it had worked?
Ra: I am Ra. The plan, which is on-going, was to take the mind/body/spirit
complex while it was separated from its yellow body physical complex shell,
to then place this mind/body/spirit complex within the negative portions of
your time/space. The shell would then become that of the unknowing,
unconscious entity and could be, shall we say, worked upon to cause
malfunction which would end in coma and then in what you call the death
of the body. At this point the higher self of the instrument would have the
choice of leaving the mind/body/spirit complex in negative sp—we
correct—time/space or of allowing incarnation in space/time of equivalent
vibration and polarity distortions. Thus this entity would become a
negatively polarized entity without the advantage of native negative
polarization. It would find a long path to the Creator under these
circumstances although the path would inevitably end well.
Questioner: Then you are saying that if this fifth-density negative entity is
successful in its attempts to transfer the mind/body/spirit complex when
that complex is in what we call the trance state to negatively polarized
time/space, then the higher self has no choice but to allow incarnation in
negatively polarized space/time? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The higher self could allow the
mind/body/spirit complex to remain in time/space. However, it is unlikely
that the higher self would do so indefinitely due to its distortion towards
the belief that the function of the mind/body/spirit complex is to experience
and learn from other-selves thus experiencing the Creator. A highly
polarized positive mind/body/spirit complex surrounded by negative
portions of space/time will experience only darkness, for like the magnet,
there is no, shall we say, likeness. Thus a barrier is automatically formed.
Questioner: Let me be sure that I understand you. Is that darkness
experienced in negative space/time or in negative time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. Negative time/space.
Questioner: Incarnation in negative space/time then in a condition like that
would result in incarnation into which density level for, let us take as an
example, the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The answer to this query violates the first distortion.

                                     127
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 68

Questioner: OK then, let’s not take the instrument as an example. Let’s
assume that this was done to a Wanderer of sixth-density. If this answer
violates the first distortion, don’t answer. But let’s say a sixth-density
Wanderer had this happen and went into negative time/space. Would that
be a sixth-density negative time/space, and would he incarnate into sixth-
density negative space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. Your assumption is correct. The strength of the polarization
would be matched as far as possible. In some positive sixth-density
Wanderers the approximation would not quite be complete due to the
paucity of negative sixth-density energy fields of the equivalent strength.
Questioner: Is the reason that this could be done the fact that the
Wanderer’s mind/body/spirit complex extracted in what we call the trance
state, leaving the third-density physical, in this state the Wanderer does not
have the full capability to magically defend itself? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In the case of this instrument, this is correct. This is also
correct when applied almost without exception to those instruments
working in trance which have not consciously experienced magical training
in time/space in the, shall we say, present incarnation. The entities of your
density capable of magical defense in this situation are extremely rare.
Questioner: It would seem to me that since I can’t imagine anything worse
than this particular result it would be very advisable to seek the magical
training and defense for this situation. Could Ra and would Ra instruct us
in this type of magical defense?
Ra: I am Ra. This request lies beyond the first distortion. The entity seeking
magical ability must do so in a certain manner. We may give instructions of
a general nature. This we have already done. The instrument has begun the
process of balancing the self. This is a lengthy process.
To take an entity before it is ready and offer it the scepter of magical power
is to infringe in an unbalanced manner. We may suggest with some asperity
that the instrument never call upon Ra in any way while unprotected by the
configuration which is at this time present.
Questioner: I think that it is important for me to investigate the techniques,
if they are within the first distortion, of the fifth-density entity who wishes
to displace the mind/body/spirit complexes of this group. Am I within the
first distortion in asking you to describe how this entity goes about this
working?
Ra: I am Ra. You are.


                                     128
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 68

Questioner: Well, then, how does this fifth-density entity go about this
working from the very start of being alerted to the fact that we exist?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity becomes aware of power. This power has the
capacity of energizing those which may be available for harvest. This entity
is desirous of disabling this power source. It sends its legions. Temptations
are offered. They are ignored or rejected. The power source persists and
indeed improves its inner connections of harmony and love of service.
The entity determines that it must needs attempt the disabling itself. By
means of projection it enters the vicinity of this power source. It assesses the
situation. It is bound by the first distortion but may take advantage of any
free will distortion. The free will, preincarnative distortions of the
instrument with regards to the physical vehicle seem the most promising
target. Any distortion away from service-to-others is also appropriate.
When the instrument leaves its physical vehicle it does so freely. Thus the
displacement of the mind/body/spirit complex of the instrument would not
be a violation of its free will if it followed the entity freely. This is the
process.
We are aware of your pressing desire to know how to become impervious as
a group to any influences such as this. The processes which you seek are a
matter of your free choice. You are aware of the principles of magical work.
We cannot speak to advise but can only suggest, as we have before, that it
would be appropriate for this group to embark upon such a path as a group,
but not individually, for obvious reasons.
Questioner: I am interested as to how the first distortion applies to the
negatively polarized entity misplacing the mind/body/spirit complex. Why
is the negatively polarized entity followed to the place of negative
time/space? Why would one of us freely follow the entity?
Ra: I am Ra. The positive polarity sees love in all things. The negative
polarity is clever.
Questioner: Then I am assuming if the negative polarity used any other
approach that did not use the free will of the other-self, he would lose
polarization and magical power. This is correct, isn’t it?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The transferred energy grows low. We wish to
close. Are there any short queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Only if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?



                                      129
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 68

Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. We realize your necessity for these
queries. All is well, my friends. We thank you and leave you in the love and
in the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the
power and in the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      130
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 69
                             August 29, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator.
Before we proceed may we make a small request for future workings. At this
particular working there is some slight interference with the contact due to
the hair of the instrument. We may suggest the combing of this antenna-
like material into a more orderly configuration prior to the working.
We communicate now.
Questioner: A question which I didn’t get to ask at the previous session and
which I will be forced to ask at this time is, is the trance state the only state
in which a mind/body/spirit positive entity may be lured by a negative
entity or adept to negative time/space configuration?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a misperceived concept. The mind/body/spirit complex
which freely leaves the third-density physical complex is vulnerable when
the appropriate protection is not at hand. You may perceive carefully that
very few entities which choose to leave their physical complexes are doing
work of such a nature as to attract the polarized attention of negatively
oriented entities. The danger to most in trance state, as you term the
physical complex being left, is the touching of the physical complex in such
a manner as to attract the mind/body/spirit complex back thereunto or to
damage the means by which that which you call ectoplasm is being recalled.
This instrument is an anomaly in that it is well that the instrument not be
touched or artificial light thrown upon it while in the trance state.
However, the ectoplasmic activity is interiorized. The main difficulty, as
you are aware, is then the previously discussed negative removal of the
entity under its free will.
That this can happen only in the trance state is not completely certain, but
it is highly probable that in another out-of-body experience such as death
the entity here examined would, as most positively polarized entities, have a
great deal of protection from comrades, guides, and portions of the self
which would be aware of the transfer you call the physical death.
Questioner: Then you are saying that the protective friends, we will call
them, would be available in every condition except for what we call the
trance state which seems to be anomalistic with respect to the others. Is this
correct?


                                       131
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 69

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Why is this trance state, as we call it, different? Why are there
not entities available in this particular state?
Ra: I am Ra. The uniqueness of this situation is not the lack of friends, for
this, as all entities, has its guides or angelic presences and, due to
polarization, teachers and friends also. The unique characteristic of the
workings which the social memory complex Ra and your group have begun
is the intent to serve others with the highest attempt at near purity which
we as comrades may achieve.
This has alerted a much more determined friend of negative polarity which
is interested in removing this particular opportunity.
We may say once again two notes: Firstly, we searched long to find an
appropriate channel or instrument and an appropriate support group. If this
opportunity is ended we shall be grateful for that which has been done, but
the possibility/probability vortices indicating the location of this
configuration again are slight. Secondly, we thank you for we know what
you sacrifice in order to do that which you as a group wish to do.
We will not deplete this instrument in so far as we are able. We have
attempted to speak of how the instrument may deplete itself through too
great a dedication to the working. All these things and all else we have said
has been heard. We are thankful. In the present situation we express thanks
to the entities who call themselves Latwii.
Questioner: Do I understand, then, that death, whether it is by natural
means or accidental means or suicide, that all deaths of this type would
create the same after-death condition which would avail the entity to its
protection from friends? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We presume you mean to inquire whether in the death
experience, no matter what the cause, the negative friends are not able to
remove an entity. This is correct largely because the entity without the
attachment to the space/time physical complex is far more aware and
without the gullibility which is somewhat the hallmark of those who love
wholeheartedly.
However, the death, if natural, would undoubtedly be the more
harmonious; the death by murder being confused and the entity needing
some time/space in which to get its bearings, so to speak; the death by
suicide causing the necessity for much healing work and, shall we say, the
making of a dedication to the third-density for the renewed opportunity of
learning the lessons set by the higher self.

                                     132
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 69

Questioner: Is this also true of unconscious conditions due to accident, or
medical anesthetic, or drugs?
Ra: I am Ra. Given that the entity is not attempting to be of service in this
particular way which is proceeding now, the entities of negative orientation
would not find it possible to remove the mind/body/spirit. The unique
characteristic, as we have said, which is, shall we say, dangerous is the
willing of the mind/body/spirit complex outward from the physical complex
of third-density for the purpose of service-to-others. In any other situation
this circumstance would not be in effect.
Questioner: Would this be a function of the balancing action of the first
distortion?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is somewhat opaque. Please restate for specificity.
Questioner: I was just guessing that since the mind/body/spirit complex’s
will from the third-density body for a particular duty or service-to-others
would then create a situation primarily with respect to the first distortion
where the opportunity for balancing this service by the negative service
would be available and, therefore, magically possible for the intrusion of the
other polarization. Is this thinking at all correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No. The free will of the instrument is indeed a necessary part
of the opportunity afforded the Orion group. However, this free will and
the first distortion applies only to the instrument. The entire hope of the
Orion group is to infringe upon free will without losing polarity. Thus this
group, if represented by a wise entity, attempts to be clever.
Questioner: Has a Wanderer ever been so infringed upon by a negative
adept and then placed in negative time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me the situation that the Wanderer finds himself
in and the path back, why that path could not be the simple moving back
into positive time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. The path back revolves, firstly, about the higher self’s
reluctance to enter negative space/time. This may be a significant part of the
length of that path. Secondly, when a positively oriented entity incarnates
in a thoroughly negative environment it must needs learn/teach the lessons
of the love of self thus becoming one with its other-selves.
When this has been accomplished the entity may then choose to release the
potential difference and change polarities.


                                     133
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 69

However, the process of learning the accumulated lessons of love of self may
be quite lengthy. Also the entity, in learning these lessons, may lose much
positive orientation during the process and the choice of reversing polarities
may be delayed until the mid-sixth-density. All of this is, in your way of
measurement, time-consuming although the end result is well.
Questioner: Is it possible to tell me roughly how many Wanderers who
have come to this planet during this master cycle have experienced this
displacement into a negative time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. We can note the number of such occurrences. There has been
only one. We cannot, due to the Law of Confusion, discuss the entity.
Questioner: You said that the higher self is reluctant to enter negative
space/time. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The incarnative process involves being incarnated from
time/space to space/time. This is correct.
Questioner: I will make this statement and see if I am correct. When first
moved into time/space of a negative polarization the positive entity
experiences nothing but darkness. Then, by incarnation into negative
space/time by the higher self, it experiences a negative space/time
environment with negatively polarized other-selves. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: It would seem to me that it would be an extremely difficult
situation for the positively polarized entity and the learning process would
be extremely traumatic. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us say that the positively polarized individual makes a poor
student of the love of self and thus spends much more time, if you will,
than those native to that pattern of vibrations.
Questioner: I am assuming that this displacement must be a function of his
free will in some way. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is absolutely correct.
Questioner: This is a point that I find quite confusing to me.
It is the function of the free will of the positively oriented entity to move
into the negatively polarized time/space. However, it is also a function of his
lack of understanding of what he is doing. I am sure that if the entity had
full understanding of what he was doing he would not do it. It is a function
of his negatively polarized other-self creating a situation where he is lured to
that configuration. What is the principle with respect to the first distortion

                                      134
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 69

that allows this to occur since we have two portions of the Creator, each of
equal value or of equal potential, but oppositely polarized and we have this
situation resulting. Could you tell me the philosophical principle behind
this particular act?
Ra: I am Ra. There are two important points in this regard. Firstly, we may
note the situation wherein an entity gets a road-map which is poorly
marked and in fact is quite incorrect. The entity sets out to its destination.
It wishes only to reach the point of destination but, becoming confused by
the faulty authority and not knowing the territory through which it drives,
it becomes hopelessly lost.
Free will does not mean that there will be no circumstances when
calculations will be awry. This is so in all aspects of the life experience.
Although there are no mistakes, there are surprises.
Secondly, that which we and you do in workings such as this carries a
magical charge, if you would use this much misunderstood term, perhaps
we may say a metaphysical power. Those who do work of power are
available for communication to and from entities of roughly similar power.
It is fortunate that the Orion entity does not have the native power of this
group. However, it is quite disciplined whereas this group lacks the finesse
equivalent to its power. Each is working in consciousness but the group has
not begun a work as a group. The individual work is helpful for the group is
mutually an aid, one to another.
Questioner: This instrument performs services that involve channeling
other members of the Confederation. We are reluctant to continue this
because of the possibility of her slipping into trance and being offered the
services of the negatively polarized entity or adept. Are there any safeguards
to create a situation whereby she cannot go into trance other than at a
protected working such as this one?
Ra: I am Ra. There are three. Firstly, the instrument must needs improve
the disciplined subconscious taboo against requesting Ra. This would
involve daily conscious and serious thought. The second safeguard is the
refraining from the opening of the instrument to questions and answers for
the present. The third is quite gross in its appearance but suffices to keep
the instrument in its physical complex. The hand may be held.
Questioner: Are you saying, then, that just by holding the instrument’s
hand during the channeling sessions this would prevent trance?
Ra: I am Ra. This would prevent those levels of meditation which
necessarily precede trance. Also in the event that, unlikely as it might seem,
the entity grew able to leave the physical complex the auric infringement
                                       135
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 69

and tactile pressure would cause the mind/body/spirit complex to refrain
from leaving.
We may note that long practice at the art which each intuits here would be
helpful. We cannot speak of methodology for the infringement would be
most great. However, to speak of group efforts is, as we scan each, merely
confirmation of what is known. Therefore, this we may do.
We have the available energy for one fairly brief query.
Questioner: There are many techniques and ways of practicing so-called
white magical arts. Are rituals designed by a particular group for their own
particular use just as good or possibly better than those that have been
practiced by groups such as the Order of the Golden Dawn and other
magical groups?
Ra: I am Ra. Although we are unable to speak with precision on this query,
we may note some gratification that the questioner has penetrated some of
the gist of a formidable system of service and discipline.
I am Ra. May we thank you again, my friends, for your conscientiousness.
All is well. We leave you rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth with joy. Adonai.




                                     136
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 70
                           September 9, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you please give me an indication of the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. We are gratified to say that it is as previously stated.
Questioner: Why do you say that you are gratified to say that?
Ra: I am Ra. We say this due to a sense of gratitude at the elements which
have enabled this instrument to maintain, against great odds, its vital energy
at normal vibratory strength. As long as this complex of energies is
satisfactory we may use this instrument without depletion regardless of the
distortions previously mentioned.
Questioner: The instrument has complained of intensive psychic attack for
the past diurnal period, approximately. Is there a reason for the
intensification of this psychic attack?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Can you tell me what this reason is, please?
Ra: I am Ra. The cause is that with which you are intimately involved, that
is, the cause is the intensive seeking for what you may call enlightenment.
This seeking upon your parts has not abated, but intensified.
In the general case, pain, as you call this distortion and the various
exaggerations of this distortion by psychic attack would, after the depletion
of physical complex energy, begin the depletion of vital energy. This
instrument guards its vital energy due to previous errors upon its part. Its
subconscious will, which is preternaturally strong for this density, has put a
ward upon this energy complex. Thus the Orion visitor strives with more
and more intensity to disturb this vital energy as this group intensifies its
dedication to service through enlightenment.
Questioner: I have an extra little question that I want to throw in at this
time. Is regressive hypnosis on an individual past birth in this incarnation to
reveal memories to it of previous incarnations a service or a disservice to it?
Ra: I am Ra. We scan your query and find you shall apply the answer to
your future. This causes us to be concerned with the first distortion.

                                      137
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

However, the query is also general and contains an opportunity for us to
express a significant point. Therefore, we shall speak.
There is an infinite range of possibility of service/disservice in the situation
of time regression hypnosis, as you term this means of aiding memory. It
has nothing to do with the hypnotist. It has only to do with the use which
the entity so hypnotized makes of the information so gleaned. If the
hypnotist desires to serve and if such a service is performed only upon
sincere request, the hypnotist is attempting to be of service.
Questioner: In the last session Ra stated that “the path back from sixth-
density negative time/space revolves, firstly, about the higher self’s
reluctance to enter negative time/space.” Could you explain the higher self’s
position with respect to positive and negative time/space and why it is so
reluctant to enter negative time/space that it is necessary for the
mind/body/spirit complex to incarnate in negative space/time to find its
path back?
Ra: I am Ra. In brief, you have answered your own query. Please question
further for more precise information.
Questioner: Why is the higher self reluctant to enter negative time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. The higher self is reluctant to allow its mind/body/spirit
complex to enter negative time/space for the same basic reason an entity of
your societal complex would be reluctant to enter a prison.
Questioner: What I am trying to understand here is more about the higher
self and its relationship with the mind/body/spirit complex. Does the higher
self have a sixth-density mind/body/spirit complex that is a separate unit
from the mind/body/spirit complex that is, in this case, displaced to
negative time/space?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The higher self is the entity of mid-sixth-
density which, turning back, offers this service to its self.
Questioner: I think I have an erroneous concept of the mind/body/spirit
complex that, for instance, I represent here in this density and my higher
self. This probably comes from my concept of space and time. I am going to
try to unscramble this. The way I see it right now is that I am existing in
two different locations, here and in mid-sixth-density, simultaneously. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are existing at all levels simultaneously. It is specifically
correct that your higher self is you in mid-sixth-density and, in your way of
measuring what you know of as time, your higher self is your self in your
future.
                                       138
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

Questioner: Am I correct in assuming that all of the mind/body/spirit
complexes that exist below levels of mid-sixth-density have a higher self at
the level of mid-sixth-density? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Would an analogy for this situation be that an individual’s
higher self is manipulating, to some extent shall I say, the mind/body/spirit
complex that is its analog to move it through the lower densities for the
purposes of gaining experience and finally transferring that experience or
amalgamating it in mid-sixth-density with the higher self?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The higher self does not manipulate its past
selves. It protects when possible and guides when asked, but the force of free
will is paramount. The seeming contradictions of determinism and free will
melt when it is accepted that there is such a thing as true simultaneity. The
higher self is the end result of all the development experienced by the
mind/body/spirit complex to that point.
Questioner: Then what we are looking at is a long path of experience
through the densities up to mid-sixth-density which is a function totally of
free will and results in the awareness of the higher self in mid-sixth-density,
but since time is illusory and there is a, shall I say, unification of time and
space or an eradication of what we think of as time, then, all of this
experience that results in the higher self, the cause of evolution through the
densities, is existing while the evolution takes place. It is all simultaneous. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We refrain from speaking of correctness due to our
understanding of the immense difficulty of absorbing the concepts of
metaphysical existence. In time/space, which is precisely as much of your
self as is space/time, all times are simultaneous just as, in your geography,
your cities and villages are all functioning, bustling, and alive with entities
going about their business at once. So it is in time/space with the self.
Questioner: The higher self existing in mid-sixth-density seems to be at the
point where the negative and positive paths of experience merge into one. Is
there a reason for this?
Ra: I am Ra. We have covered this material previously.
Questioner: Oh yes. Sorry about that. It slipped my mind. Now, if a
positive entity is displaced to negative time/space I understand that the
higher self is reluctant to enter the negative time/space. For some reason it
makes it necessary for the mind/body/spirit complex to incarnate in


                                       139
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

negative space/time. Why is it necessary for this incarnation in negative
space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, let us remove the concept of reluctance from the
equation and then secondly, address your query more to the point. Each
time/space is an analog of a particular sort or vibration of space/time. When
a negative time/space is entered by an entity the next experience will be that
of the appropriate space/time. This is normally done by the form-making
body of a mind/body/spirit complex which places the entity in the proper
time/space for incarnation.
Questioner: I think that to clear up this point I will ask a few questions that
are related that will possibly help me to understand this better because I am
really confused about this and I think it is a very important point in
understanding the creation and the Creator in general, you might say. If a
Wanderer of fourth, fifth, or sixth-density dies from this third-density state
in which we presently find ourselves, does he then find himself in the third-
density time/space after death?
Ra: I am Ra. This will depend upon the plan which has been approved by
the Council of Nine. Some Wanderers offer themselves for but one
incarnation while others offer themselves for varying lengths of your time
up to and including the last two cycles of 25,000 years. If the agreed-upon
mission is completed the Wanderer’s mind/body/spirit complex will go to
the home vibration.
Questioner: Have there been any Wanderers on this planet for the past
50,000 years now?
Ra: I am Ra. There have been a few. There have been many more which
chose to join this last cycle of 25,000 years and many, many more which
have come for harvest.
Questioner: Now here is the point of my confusion. If, after physical death,
a Wanderer would return to his home planet why cannot the same entity be
extracted from negative time/space to the home planet rather than
incarnating in negative space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. As we stated, the position in negative time/space, of which we
previously were speaking, is that position which is preincarnative. After the
death of the physical complex in yellow-ray activation the mind/body/spirit
complex moves to a far different portion of time/space in which the indigo
body will allow much healing and review to take place before any
movement is made towards another incarnative experience.



                                     140
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

I perceive a basic miscalculation upon your part in that time/space is no
more homogenous than space/time. It is as complex and complete a system
of illusions, dances, and pattern as is space/time and has as structured a
system of what you may call natural laws.
Questioner: I’ll ask this question to inform me a little about what you just
stated. When you came to this planet in craft 18,000 and 11,000 years ago,
these craft have been called bell craft and were photographed by George
Adamski. If I am correct these craft looked somewhat like a bell; they had
portholes around them in the upper portions; and they had three
hemispheres at 120° apart underneath. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Were these constructed in time/space or in space/time?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask your persistent patience, for our answer must be
complex.
A construct of thought was formed in time/space. This portion of
time/space is that which approaches the speed of light. In time/space, at this
approach, the conditions are such that time becomes infinite and mass
ceases so that one which is able to skim the, shall we say, boundary strength
of this time/space is able to become placed where it will.
When we were where we wished to be we then clothed the construct of
light with that which would appear as the crystal bell. This was formed
through the boundary into space/time. Thus there were two constructs, the
time/space or immaterial construct, and the space/time or materialized
construct.
Questioner: Was there a reason for the particular shape that you chose, in
particular a reason for the three hemispheres on the bottom?
Ra: I am Ra. It seemed an aesthetically pleasing form and one well suited to
those limited uses which we must needs make of your space/time
motivating requirements.
Questioner: Was there a principle of motivation contained within the three
hemispheres on the bottom, or were they just aesthetic, or were they
landing gear?
Ra: I am Ra. These were aesthetic and part of a system of propulsion. These
hemispheres were not landing gear.
Questioner: I am sorry to ask such stupid questions, but I am trying to
determine something about space/time, time/space, and this very difficult
area of the mechanism of evolution. I think it is central to the
                                     141
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

understanding of our evolution. However, I am not sure of this and I may
be wasting my time. Could Ra comment on whether I am wasting my time
in this particular investigation or whether it would be fruitful?
Ra: I am Ra. Since the concepts of space/time, or physics, and time/space,
or metaphysics, are mechanical they are not central to the spiritual
evolution of the mind/body/spirit complex. The study of love and light is
far more productive in its motion towards unity in those entities pondering
such concepts. However, this material is, shall we say, of some small interest
and is harmless.
Questioner: I was asking these questions primarily to understand or to
build a base for an attempt to get a little bit of enlightenment on the way
that time/space and space/time are related to the evolution of the
mind/body/spirit complex so that I could better understand the techniques
of evolution. For instance, you stated “the potential difference may be
released and polarity changed after an entity has learned/taught the lessons
of love of self” if the entity is a positive entity that has found itself in
negative time/space and has had to incarnate into negative space/time.
What I was trying to do was build a base for an attempt to get a slight
understanding of what you meant by this statement that potential difference
may be released and polarity changed after the above step. I am very
interested in knowing, if placed in a negative time/space, why it is necessary
to incarnate in negative space/time and learn/teach love of self and
develop—I guess—a sixth-density level of polarity before you can release
that potential difference. Could you speak on that subject?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
The entity which incarnates into negative space/time will not find it
possible to maintain any significant positive polarity as negativity, when
pure, is a type of gravity well, shall we say, pulling all into it. Thus the
entity, while remembering its learned and preferred polarity, must needs
make use of the catalyst given and recapitulate the lessons of service to self
in order to build up enough polarity in order to cause the potential to occur
for reversal.
There is much in this line of questioning which is somewhat muddled. May
we, at this point allow the questioner to rephrase the question or to turn the
direction of query more towards that which is the heart of its concern.
Questioner: I will, at the next session, then attempt to turn more toward
the heart. I was attempting in this session to get at a point that I thought
was central to the evolution of spirit but I seem to have gone awry. It is
sometimes very, very difficult for me to question wisely in these areas.

                                      142
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 70

I will just ask if there is anything that we can do to enhance the contact or
to make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. You are most conscientious and the alignments are especially
good. We thank you, my friends, and have been glad to speak with you. We
are attempting to be of the greatest aid to you by taking care not to deplete
this instrument. Thus although a reserve remains we will attempt from this
working onward to keep this reserve, for this instrument has arranged its
subconscious to accept this configuration.
I am Ra. You are all doing well, my friends. We leave you in the love and in
the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing and
glorying in the power and in the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      143
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 71
                           September 18, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated with the exception of a slight
improvement in the vital energy distortions. One may note to the support
group, without infringement, that it is well to aid the instrument in the
reminders that while physical complex distortions remain as they are it is
not advisable to use the increased vital energies for physical complex
activities as this will take a somewhat harsh toll.
Questioner: In this session I hope to ask several different questions to
establish a point of entry into an investigation that will be fruitful. I would
first ask if it is possible to increase polarity without increasing harvestability?
Ra: I am Ra. The connection between polarization and harvestability is
most important in third-density harvest. In this density an increase in the
serving of others or the serving of self will almost inevitably increase the
ability of an entity to enjoy an higher intensity of light. Thus in this
density, we may say, it is hardly possible to polarize without increasing in
harvestability.
Questioner: This would probably be possible in the higher densities such as
the fifth-density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In fifth-density harvest, polarization has very little do to with
harvestability.
Questioner: Would you explain the concept of working with the
unmanifested being in third-density to accelerate evolution?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a many-layered question and which stria we wish to
expose is questionable. Please restate giving any further depth of
information requested, if possible.
Questioner: Define, please, the unmanifested being.
Ra: I am Ra. We may see that you wish to pursue the deeper strata of
information. We shall, therefore, answer in a certain way which does not
exhaust the query but is designed to move beneath the outer teachings
somewhat.


                                       144
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

The unmanifested being is, as we have said, that being which exists and
does its work without reference to or aid from other-selves. To move into
this concept you may see the inevitable connection between the
unmanifested self and the metaphysical or time/space analog of the
space/time self. The activities of meditation, contemplation, and what may
be called the internal balancing of thoughts and reactions are those activities
of the unmanifested self more closely aligned with the metaphysical self.
Questioner: As an entity goes through the death process in third-density it
finds itself in time/space. It finds itself in a different set of circumstances.
Would you please describe the circumstances or properties of time/space
and then the process of healing of incarnative experiences that some entities
encounter?
Ra: I am Ra. Although this query is difficult to answer adequately, due to
the limitations of your space/time sound vibration complexes, we shall
respond to the best of our ability.
The hallmark of time/space is the inequity between time and space. In your
space/time the spatial orientation of material causes a tangible framework
for illusion. In time/space the inequity is upon the shoulders of that
property known to you as time. This property renders entities and
experiences intangible in a relative sense. In your framework each particle or
core vibration moves at a velocity which approaches what you call the speed
of light from the direction of supraluminal velocities.
Thus the time/space or metaphysical experience is that which is very finely
tuned and, although an analog of space/time, lacking in its tangible
characteristics. In these metaphysical planes there is a great deal of what you
call time which is used to review and re-review the biases and
learn/teachings of a prior, as you would call it, space/time incarnation.
The extreme fluidity of these regions makes it possible for much to be
penetrated which must needs be absorbed before the process of healing of
an entity may be accomplished. Each entity is located in a somewhat
immobile state much as you are located in space/time in a somewhat
immobile state in time. In this immobile space the entity has been placed by
the form-maker and higher self so that it may be in the proper
configuration for learn/teaching that which it has received in the space/time
incarnation.
Depending upon this time/space locus there will be certain helpers which
assist in this healing process. The process involves seeing in full the
experience, seeing it against the backdrop of the mind/body/spirit complex
total experience, forgiving the self for all missteps as regards the missed

                                      145
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

guideposts during the incarnation and, finally, the careful assessment of the
next necessities for learning. This is done entirely by the higher self until an
entity has become conscious in space/time of the process and means of
spiritual evolution at which time the entity will consciously take part in all
decisions.
Questioner: Is the process in positive time/space identical with the process
in negative time/space for this healing?
Ra: I am Ra. The process in space/time of the forgiveness and acceptance is
much like that in time/space in that the qualities of the process are
analogous. However, while in space/time it is not possible to determine the
course of events beyond the incarnation but only to correct present
imbalances. In time/space, upon the other hand, it is not possible to correct
any unbalanced actions but rather to perceive the imbalances and thusly
forgive the self for that which is.
The decisions then are made to set up the possibility/probabilities of
correcting these imbalances in what you call future space/time experiences.
The advantage of time/space is that of the fluidity of the grand overview.
The advantage of space/time is that, working in darkness with a tiny candle,
one may correct imbalances.
Questioner: If an entity has chosen the negative polarization are the
processes of healing and review similar for the negative path?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Are the processes that we are talking about processes that occur
on many planets in our Milky Way Galaxy, or do they occur on all planets,
or what percentage?
Ra: I am Ra. These processes occur upon all planets which have given birth
to sub-Logoi such as yourselves. The percentage of inhabited planets is
approximately 10%.
Questioner: What percentage of stars, roughly, have planetary systems?
Ra: I am Ra. This is unimportant information, but harmless.
Approximately 32% of stars have planets as you know them while another
6% have some sort of clustering material which upon some densities might
be inhabitable.
Questioner: This would tell me that roughly 3% of all stars have inhabited
planets. This process of evolution is in effect throughout the known
universe then. Is this correct?


                                      146
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

RA; I am Ra. This octave of infinite knowledge of the one Creator is as it is
throughout the One Infinite Creation, with variations programmed by sub-
Logoi of what you call major galaxies and minor galaxies. These variations
are not significant but may be compared to various regions of geographical
location sporting various ways of pronouncing the same sound vibration
complex or concept.
Questioner: It seems to me from this that the sub-Logos such as our sun
uses free will to modify only slightly a much more general idea of created
evolution so that the general plan of created evolution then seems to be
uniform throughout the One Infinite Creation. The process is for the sub-
Logoi to grow through the densities and, under the first distortion, find
their way back to the original thought. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then each entity is of a path that leads to one destination. This
is like many, many roads that travel through many, many places but
eventually merge into one large center. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct but somewhat wanting in depth of description.
More applicable would be the thought that each entity contains within it all
of the densities and sub-densities of the octave so that in each entity, no
matter whither its choices lead it, its great internal blueprint is one with all
others. Thusly its experiences will fall into the patterns of the journey back
to the original Logos. This is done through free will but the materials from
which choices can be made are one blueprint.
Questioner: You have made the statement that pure negativity acts as a
gravity well pulling all into it. I was wondering first if pure positivity has
precisely the same effect? Could you answer that please?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. Positivity has a much weaker effect due to
the strong element of recognition of free will in any positivity approaching
purity. Thus although the negatively oriented entity may find it difficult to
polarize negatively in the midst of such resounding harmony it will not find
it impossible.
Upon the other hand, the negative polarization is one which does not
accept the concept of the free will of other-selves. Thusly in a social
complex whose negativity approaches purity the pull upon other-selves is
constant. A positively oriented entity in such a situation would desire for
other-selves to have their free will and thusly would find itself removed
from its ability to exercise its own free will, for the free will of negatively
oriented entities is bent upon conquest.

                                       147
                 The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

Questioner: Could you please comment on the accuracy of these
statements. I am going to talk in general about the concept of magic and
first define it as the ability to create changes in consciousness at will. Is this
an acceptable definition?
Ra: I am Ra. This definition is acceptable in that it places upon the adept
the burden it shall bear. It may be better understood by referring back to an
earlier query, in your measurement, within this working having to do with
the unmanifested self. In magic one is working with one’s unmanifested self
in body, in mind, and in spirit; the mixture depending upon the nature of
the working.
These workings are facilitated by the enhancement of the activation of the
indigo-ray energy center. The indigo-ray energy center is fed, as are all
energy centers, by experience but far more than the others is fed by what we
have called the disciplines of the personality.
Questioner: I will state that the objective of the white magical ritual is to
create a change in consciousness of a group. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Not necessarily. It is possible for what you term white magic
to be worked for the purpose of altering only the self or the place of
working. This is done in the knowledge that to aid the self in polarization
towards love and light is to aid the planetary vibration.
Questioner: The change in consciousness should result in a greater
distortion towards service-to-others, towards unity with all, and towards
knowing in order to serve. Is this correct, and are there any other desired
results?
Ra: I am Ra. These are commendable phrases. The heart of white magic is
the experience of the joy of union with the Creator. This joy will of
necessity radiate throughout the life experience of the positive adept. It is
for this reason that sexual magic is not restricted solely to the negatively
oriented polarizing adepts but when most carefully used has its place in high
magic as it, when correctly pursued, joins body, mind, and spirit with the
one infinite Creator.
Any purpose which you may frame should, we suggest, take into
consideration this basic union with the one infinite Creator, for this union
will result in service-to-others of necessity.
Questioner: There are, shall I say, certain rules of white magic. I will read
these few and I would like you to comment on the philosophical content or
basis of these and add to this list any of importance that I have neglected.
First, a special place of working preferably constructed by the practitioners;

                                        148
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

second, a special signal or key such as a ring to summon the magical
personality; third, special clothing worn only for the workings; fourth, a
specific time of day; fifth, a series of ritual sound vibratory complexes
designed to create the desired mental distortion; sixth, a group objective for
each session. Could you comment on this list please?
Ra: I am Ra. To comment upon this list is to play the mechanic which
views the instruments of the orchestra and adjusts and tunes the
instruments. You will note these are mechanical details. The art does not lie
herein.
The one item of least import is what you call the time of day. This is
important in those experiential nexi wherein the entities search for the
metaphysical experience without conscious control over the search. The
repetition of workings gives this search structure. In this particular group
the structure is available without the need for inevitable sameness of times
of working. We may note that this regularity is always helpful.
Questioner: You stated in a previous session that Ra searched for some time
to find a group such as this one. I would assume that this search was for the
purpose of communicating the Law of One. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. We also, as we have said, wished to
attempt to make reparation for distortions of this law set in motion by our
naive actions of your past.
Questioner: Can you tell me if we have covered the necessary material at
this point to, if published, make the necessary reparations for the naive
actions?
Ra: I am Ra. We mean no disrespect for your service, but we do not expect
to make full reparations for these distortions. We may, however, offer our
thoughts in the attempt. The attempt is far more important to us than the
completeness of the result. The nature of your language is such that what is
distorted cannot, to our knowledge, be fully undistorted but only
illuminated somewhat. In response to your desire to see the relationship
betwixt space/time and time/space may we say that we conducted this
search in time/space for in this illusion one may quite readily see entities as
vibratory complexes and groups as harmonics within vibratory complexes.
Questioner: I see the most important aspect of this communication as being
a vehicle of partial enlightenment for those incarnate now who have become
aware of their part in their own evolutionary process. Am I correct in this
assumption?



                                      149
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 71

Ra: I am Ra. You are correct. We may note that this is the goal of all
artifacts and experiences which entities may come into contact with and is
not only the property of Ra or this contact.
We find that this instrument has neglected to continue to remind its self of
the need for holding some portion of energy back for reserve. This is
recommended as a portion of the inner program to be reinstated as it will
lengthen the number of workings we may have. This is acceptable to us.
The transferred energy grows quite, quite low. We must leave you shortly.
Is there a brief query at this time?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to improve the contact or to
make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. Remain most fastidious about the
alignments of the appurtenances. We thank you. I am Ra. I leave you in the
love and in the glorious light of the infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore,
rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     150
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 72
                            October 14, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s physical energy distortions are as previously
stated. The vital energy level has become distorted from normal levels,
somewhat downward, due to the distortion in this instrument’s mind
complex activity that it has been responsible for the, shall we say, difficulties
in achieving the appropriate configuration for this contact.
Questioner: Was the banishing ritual that we performed of any effect in
purifying the place of working and the screening of influences that we do
not wish?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me what I can do to improve the effectiveness of
the ritual?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Can you tell me what caused the instrument to become in a
condition toward unconsciousness in the last two meditations prior to this
one to such an extent that we discontinued them?
Ra: I am Ra. We can.
Questioner: Would you please tell me then?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity which greets this instrument from the Orion group
first attempted to cause the mind/body/spirit complex, which you may call
spirit, to leave the physical complex of yellow-ray in the deluded belief that
it was preparing for the Ra contact. You are familiar with this tactic and its
consequences. The instrument, with no pause, upon feeling this greeting,
called for the grounding within the physical complex by requesting that the
hand be held. Thus the greatest aim of the Orion entity was not achieved.
However, it discovered that those present were not capable of distinguishing
between unconsciousness with the mind/body/spirit intact and the trance
state in which the mind/body/spirit complex is not present.
Therefore, it applied to the fullest extent the greeting which causes the
dizziness and in meditation without protection caused, in this instrument,
                                       151
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 72

simple unconsciousness as in what you would call fainting or vertigo. The
Orion entity consequently used this tactic to stop the Ra contact from
having the opportunity to be accomplished.
Questioner: The instrument has scheduled an operation on her hand next
month. If the general anesthetic is used to produce the unconscious state
will this or any other parameters of the operation allow for any inroads by
the Orion entities?
Ra: I am Ra. It is extremely improbable due to the necessity for the
intention of the mind/body/spirit complex, when departing the yellow-ray
physical complex, to be serving the Creator in the most specific fashion.
The attitude of one approaching such an experience as you describe would
not be approaching the unconscious state with such an attitude.
Questioner: We have here, I believe, a very important principle with respect
to the Law of One. You have stated that the attitude of the individual is of
paramount importance for the Orion entity to be able to be effective.
Would you please explain how this mechanism works with respect to the
Law of One and why the attitude of the entity is of paramount importance
and why this allows for action by the Orion entity?
Ra: I am Ra. The Law of Confusion or Free Will is utterly paramount in
the workings of the infinite creation. That which is intended has as much
intensity of attraction to the polar opposite as the intensity of the intention
or desire.
Thus those whose desires are shallow or transitory experience only
ephemeral configurations of what might be called the magical circumstance.
There is a turning point, a fulcrum which swings as a mind/body/spirit
complex tunes its will to service. If this will and desire is for service-to-
others the corresponding polarity will be activated. In the circumstance of
this group there are three such wills acting as one with the instrument in
the, shall we say, central position of fidelity to service. This is as it must be
for the balance of the working and the continuance of the contact. Our
vibratory complex is one-pointed in these workings also and our will to
serve is also of some degree of purity. This has created the attraction of the
polar opposite which you experience.
We may note that such a configuration of free will, one-pointed in service-
to-others, also has the potential for the alerting of a great mass of light
strength. This positive light strength, however, operates also under free will
and must be invoked. We could not speak to this and shall not guide you,
for the nature of this contact is such that the purity of your free will must,


                                       152
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 72

above all things, be preserved. Thus you wend your way through
experiences discovering those biases which may be helpful.
Questioner: The negatively oriented entities who contact us and others on
this planet are limited by the first distortion. They have obviously been
limited by the banishing ritual just performed. Could you describe, with
respect to free will, how they limit themselves in order to work within the
first distortion and how the banishing ritual itself works?
Ra: I am Ra. This query has several portions. Firstly, those of negative
polarity do not operate with respect to free will unless it is necessary. They
call themselves and will infringe whenever they feel it possible.
Secondly, they are limited by the great Law of Confusion in that, for the
most part, they are unable to enter this planetary sphere of influence and are
able to use the windows of time/space distortion only in so far as there is
some calling to balance the positive calling. Once they are here, their desire
is conquest.
Thirdly, in the instance of this instrument’s being removed permanently
from this space/time, it is necessary to allow the instrument to leave its
yellow-ray physical complex of its free will. Thus trickery has been
attempted.
The use of the light forms being generated is such as to cause such entities
to discover a wall through which they can not pass. This is due to the
energy complexes of the light beings and aspects of the one infinite Creator
invoked and evoked in the building of the wall of light.
Questioner: Everything that we experience with respect to this contact, our
distortion toward knowledge in order to serve, the Orion entity’s distortion
towards reducing the effectiveness of this contact, all of this is a result of the
first distortion, as I see it, in creating the totally free atmosphere for the
Creator to become more knowledgeable of Itself through the interplay of its
portions, one with respect to the other. Is my view correct with respect to
what I have just said?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: In the last session you mentioned that if the instrument used
any of the increased vital energy that she experiences for physical activity
that she would pay a “harsh toll.” Could you tell me the nature of that
harsh toll and why it would be experienced?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical energy level is a measure of the amount of
available energy of the body complex of a mind/body/spirit complex. The

                                       153
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 72

vital energy measurement is one which expresses the amount of energy of
being of the mind/body/spirit complex.
This entity has great distortions in the direction of mind complex activity,
spirit complex activity, and that great conduit to the Creator, the will.
Therefore, this instrument’s vital energy, even in the absence of any physical
reserve measurable, is quite substantial. However, the use of this energy of
will, mind, and spirit for the things of the physical complex causes a far
greater distortion in the lessening of the vital energy than would the use of
this energy for those things which are in the deepest desires and will of the
mind/body/spirit complex. In this entity these desires are for service to the
Creator. This entity sees all service as service to the Creator and this is why
we have cautioned the support group and the instrument itself in this
regard. All services are not equal in depth of distortion. The over-use of this
vital energy is, to be literal, the rapid removal of life-force.
Questioner: You mentioned that the large amount of light that is available.
Could this group, by proper ritual, use this for recharging the vital energy of
the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, we caution against any working
which raises up any personality; rather it is well to be fastidious in your
working.
Questioner: Could you explain what you mean by “raises up any
personality”?
Ra: I am Ra. Clues, we may offer. Explanation is infringement. We can
only ask that you realize that all are One.
Questioner: We have included “Shin” in the banishing ritual, ”Yod-Heh-
Vau-Heh” to make it ”Yod-Heh-Shin-Vau-Heh.” Is this helpful?
Ra: I am Ra. This is helpful especially to the instrument whose distortions
vibrate greatly in congruency with this sound vibration complex.
Questioner: We will in the future have group meditations. I am concerned
about protection for the instrument if she is once more a channel in these
meditations. Is there an optimum time or limiting amount of time for the
banishing ritual to be effective, or if we continued daily to purify the place
of working with the banishing ritual would this carry over for long periods
of time, or must the ritual be done immediately prior to the meditations?
Ra: I am Ra. Your former assumption is more nearly correct.
Questioner: Is there any danger now, with the precautions that we are
taking, of the instrument being led away by the Orion entity?

                                      154
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 72

Ra: I am Ra. The opportunities for the Orion entity are completely
dependent upon the instrument’s condition of awareness and readiness. We
would suggest that this instrument is still too much the neophyte to open
its self to questions since that is the format used by Ra. As the instrument
grows in awareness this precaution may become unnecessary.
Questioner: Why is there no protection at the floor or bottom of the
banishing ritual, and should there be?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working.
The development of the psychic greeting is possible only through the energy
centers starting from a station which you might call within the violet-ray
moving through the adept’s energy center and therefrom towards the target
of opportunity. Depending upon the vibratory nature and purpose of
greeting, be it positive or negative, the entity will be energized or blocked in
the desired way.
We of Ra approach this instrument in narrow band contact through violet-
ray. Others might pierce down through this ray to any energy center. We,
for instance, make great use of this instrument’s blue-ray energy center as
we are attempting to communicate our distortion/understandings of the
Law of One.
The entity of Orion pierces the same violet-ray and moves to two places to
attempt most of its non-physical opportunities. It activates the green-ray
energy center while further blocking indigo-ray energy center. This
combination causes confusion in the instrument and subsequent over-
activity in unwise proportions in physical complex workings. It simply seeks
out the distortions preincarnatively programmed and developed in
incarnative state.
The energies of life itself, being the one infinite Creator, flow from the
south pole of the body seen in its magnetic form. Thus only the Creator
may, through the feet, enter the energy shell of the body to any effect. The
effects of the adept are those from the upper direction and thus the building
of the wall of light is quite propitious.
May we ask if there are any shorter queries at this time?
Questioner: I would just ask if there is anything that we could do to make
the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument has some increased distortion in the region of
the neck. Some attention here might provide greater comfort. All is well,
my friends. The forbearance and patience observed by Ra are commendable.
Continue in this fastidiousness of purpose and care for the appropriate
                                      155
               The Law of One, Book III, Session 72

configurations for contact and our continuance of contact will continue to
be possible. This is acceptable to us.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, glorying in the love and the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace
of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     156
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 73
                            October 21, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you please give me an indication of the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated with the exception of the vital energy
level which is distorted more nearly towards that which is normal for this
entity.
Questioner: Has the banishing ritual that we have performed been helpful
for this contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The ritual described has gained with each working in making
efficacious the purity of contact needed not only for the Ra contact but for
any working of the adept.
Questioner: Thank you. I would like to thank Ra at this time for the
opportunity to be of service to those on this sphere who would want to have
the information that we gain here.
You stated that free will, one-pointed in service-to-others had the potential
of alerting a great mass of light strength. I assume that the same holds
precisely true for the service-to-self polarity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect but subtly so. In invocation and evocation of
what may be termed negative entities or qualities the expression alerts the
positively oriented equivalent. However, those upon the service-to-others
path wait to be called and can only send love.
Questioner: What I was trying to get at was that this alerting of light
strength is, as I see it, a process that must be totally a function of free will,
as you say, and as the desire and will and purity of desire of the adept
increases, the alerting of light strength increases. Is this part of it the same
for both the positive and negative potentials and am I correct with this
statement?
Ra: I am Ra. To avoid confusion we shall simply restate for clarity your
correct assumption.
Those who are upon the service-to-others path may call upon the light
strength in direct proportion to the strength and purity of their will to


                                        157
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

serve. Those upon the service-to-self path may call upon the dark strength
in direct proportion to the strength and purity of their will to serve.
Questioner: I will undoubtedly make many errors in my statements today
because what I am trying to do is guess at how this works and let you
correct me. In considering the exercise of the Middle Pillar I have thought it
might be wrong in that in it the adept sees or visualizes the light moving
downward from the crown chakra down to the feet. Ra has stated that the
Creator enters from the feet and moves upward, that this spiraling light
enters from the feet and moves upward. It seems to me that the adept
alerting the light strength, in visualizing the use of this, would visualize it
entering the feet and energizing first, the red energy center and then moving
upward through the energy centers in that fashion. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Could you tell me where I am wrong in that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would you please do that?
Ra: I am Ra. There are two concepts with which you deal. The first is the
great way of the development of the light in the microcosmic
mind/body/spirit. It is assumed that an adept will have its energy centers
functioning smoothly and in a balanced manner to its best effort before a
magical working. All magical workings are based upon evocation and/or
invocation.
The first invocation of any magical working is that invocation of the
magical personality as you are familiar with this term. In the working of
which you speak the first station is the beginning of the invocation of this
magical personality which is invoked by the motion of putting on
something. Since you do not have an item of apparel or talisman the gesture
which you have made is appropriate.
The second station is the evocation of the great cross of life. This is an
extension of the magical personality to become the Creator. Again, all
invocations and evocations are drawn through the violet energy center. This
may then be continued towards whatever energy centers are desired to be
used.
Questioner: Then will you speak of the difference between the spiraling
light that enters through the feet and the light invoked through the crown
chakra?



                                      158
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Ra: I am Ra. The action of the upward spiraling light drawn by the will to
meet the inner light of the one infinite Creator may be likened to the
beating of the heart and the movement of the muscles surrounding the
lungs and all the other functions of the parasympathetic nervous system.
The calling of the adept may be likened to those nerve and muscle actions
over which the mind/body/spirit complex has conscious control.
Questioner: Previously you stated that where the two directions meet you
have a measure of the development of the particular mind/body/spirit
complex. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: It would seem to me that the visualization of the invocation
would be dependent upon what the use was to be of the light. The use
could be for healing, communication, or for the general awareness of the
creation and the Creator. Would you please speak on this process and my
correctness in making this assumption?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall offer some thoughts though it is doubtful that we
may exhaust this subject. Each visualization, regardless of the point of the
working, begins with some work within the indigo-ray. As you may be
aware, the ritual which you have begun is completely working within the
indigo-ray. This is well for it is the gateway. From this beginning light may
be invoked for communication or for healing.
You may note that in the ritual which we offered you to properly begin the
Ra workings the first focus is upon the Creator. We would further note a
point which is both subtile and of some interest. The upward spiraling light
developed in its path by the will, and ultimately reaching an high place of
mating with the inward fire of the one Creator, still is only preparation for
the work upon the mind/body/spirit which may be done by the adept.
There is some crystallization of the energy centers used during each working
so that the magician becomes more and more that which it seeks.
More importantly, the time/space mind/body/spirit analog, which is evoked
as the magical personality, has its only opportunity to gain rapidly from the
experience of the catalytic action available to the third-density space/time
mind/body/spirit. Thus the adept is aiding the Creator greatly by offering
great catalyst to a greater portion of the creation which is identified as the
mind/body/spirit totality of an entity.
Questioner: Desire and will are the factors in this process. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We would add one quality. In the magical personality desire,
will, and polarity are the keys.

                                      159
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Questioner: Many so-called evangelists which we have in our society at
present have great desire and very great will, and possibly great polarity, but
it seems to me that in many cases that there is a lack of awareness that
creates a less than effective working in the magical sense. Am I correct in
this analysis?
Ra: I am Ra. You are partially correct. In examining the polarity of a
service-to-others working the free will must be seen as paramount. Those
entities of which you speak are attempting to generate positive changes in
consciousness while abridging free will. This causes the blockage of the
magical nature of the working except in those cases wherein an entity freely
desires to accept the working of the evangelist, as you have called it.
Questioner: What was the orientation with respect to this type of
communication for the one known as Jesus of Nazareth?
Ra: I am Ra. You may have read some of this entity’s workings. It offered
itself as teacher to those mind/body/spirit complexes which gathered to hear
and even then spoke as through a veil so as to leave room for those not
wishing to hear. When this entity was asked to heal, it oft times did so,
always ending the working with two admonitions: firstly, that the entity
healed had been healed by its faith, that is, its ability to allow and accept
changes through the violet-ray into the gateway of intelligent energy;
secondly, saying always, “Tell no one.” These are the workings which
attempt the maximal quality of free will while maintaining fidelity to the
positive purity of the working.
Questioner: An observation of the working itself by another entity would
seem to me to partially abridge free will in that a seemingly magical
occurrence had taken place as the result of the working of an adept. This
could be extended to any phenomenon which is other than normal or
acceptable. Could you speak on this paradox that is immediately the
problem of anyone doing healing?
Ra: I am Ra. We are humble messengers of the Law of One. To us there are
no paradoxes. The workings which seem magical and, therefore, seem to
infringe upon free will do not, in themselves, do so, for the distortions of
perception are as many as the witnesses and each witness sees what it desires
to see. Infringement upon free will occurs in this circumstance only if the
entity doing the working ascribes the authorship of this event to its self or
its own skills. He who states that no working comes from it but only
through it is not infringing upon free will.
Questioner: The one known as Jesus accumulated twelve disciples. What
was his purpose in having these disciples with him?

                                      160
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Ra: I am Ra. What is the purpose of teach/learning if there be no
learn/teachers? Those drawn to this entity were accepted by this entity
without regard for any outcome. This entity accepted the honor/duty
placed upon it by its nature and its sense that to speak was its mission.
Questioner: In the exercise of the fire I assume the healer would be working
with the same energy that we spoke of as entering through the crown
chakra. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct with some additional notation necessary for
your thought in continuing this line of study. When the magical personality
has been seated in the green-ray energy center for healing work the energy
then may be seen to be the crystalline center through which body energy is
channeled. Thus this particular form of healing uses both the energy of the
adept and the energy of the upward spiraling light. As the green-ray center
becomes more brilliant, and we would note this brilliance does not imply
over-activation but rather crystallization, the energy of the green-ray center
of the body complex spirals twice; firstly, clockwise from the green-ray
energy center to the right shoulder, through the head, the right elbow,
down through the solar plexus, and to the left hand. This sweeps all the
body complex energy into a channel which then rotates the great circle
clockwise again from right—we correct this instrument—from the left to
the feet, to the right hand, to the crown, to the left hand, and so forth.
Thus the in-coming body energy, crystallized, regularized, and channeled by
the adept’s personality reaching to the green-ray energy center, may then
pour out the combined energies of the adept which is incarnate thus
offering the service of healing to an entity requesting that service. This basic
situation is accomplished as well when there is an entity which is working
through a channel to heal.
Questioner: Can you tell me how this transfer of light, I believe it would
be, would affect the patient to be healed?
Ra: I am Ra. The effect is that of polarization. The entity may or may not
accept any percentage of this polarized life-energy which is being offered. In
the occasion of the laying on of hands this energy is more specifically
channeled and the opportunity for acceptance of this energy similarly more
specific.
It may be seen that the King’s Chamber effect is not attempted in this form
of working but rather the addition to one, whose energies are low, of the
opportunity for the building up of those energies. Many of your distortions
called illnesses may be aided by such means.


                                      161
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Questioner: As a general statement which you can correct, the overall
picture, as I see it, of the healer and patient is that the one to be healed has,
because of a blockage in one of the energy centers or more—we will just
consider one particular problem—because of this energy center blockage the
upward spiraling light which creates one of the seven bodies has been
blocked from the maintenance of that body, and this has resulted in the
distortion from the perfection of that body which we call disease or a bodily
anomaly which is other than perfect. The healer, having suitably configured
its energy centers, is able to channel light, the downward pouring light,
through its properly configured energy centers to the one to be healed. If
the one to be healed has the mental configuration of acceptance of this
light, the light then enters the physical complex and re-configures the
distortion that is created by the original blockage. I am sure that I have
made some mistakes in all this. Would you please correct them?
Ra: I am Ra. Your mistakes were small. We would not, at this time, attempt
a great deal of refinement of that statement as there is preliminary material
which will undoubtedly come forward. We may say that there are various
forms of healing. In many, only the energy of the adept is used. In the
exercise of fire some physical complex energy is also channeled.
We might note further that when the one wishing to be healed, though
sincere, remains unhealed, as you call this distortion, you may consider
preincarnative choices and your more helpful aid to such an entity may be
the suggestion that it meditate upon the affirmative uses of whatever
limitations it might experience. We would also note that in these cases the
indigo-ray workings are often of aid.
Other than these notes, we do not wish to further comment upon your
statement at this working.
Questioner: It seems to me that the primary thing of importance for those
on the service-to-others path is the development of an attitude which I can
only describe as a vibration. This attitude would be developed through
meditation, ritual, and the developing appreciation for the creation or
Creator which results in a state of mind that can only be expressed by me as
an increase in vibration or oneness with all. Could you expand and correct
that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall not correct this statement but shall expand upon it
by suggesting that to those qualities you may add the living day by day and
moment by moment, for the true adept lives more and more as it is.




                                      162
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Questioner: Thank you. Could you tell me of the number of possible
energy transfers between two or more mind/body/spirit complexes. Is it very
large, or are there few?
Ra: I am Ra. The number is infinite, for is not each mind/body/spirit
complex unique?
Questioner: Could you define this statement “energy transfer between two
mind/body/spirit complexes”?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full query of this working. This entity still
has transferred energy available, but we find rapidly increasing distortions
towards pain in the neck, the dorsal area, and the wrists and manual
appendages.
The physical energy transfer may be done numerous ways.
We shall give two examples. Each begins with some sense of the self as
Creator or in some way the magical personality being invoked. This may be
consciously or unconsciously done. Firstly, that exercise of which we have
spoken called the exercise of fire: this is, through physical energy transfer,
not that which is deeply involved in the body complex combinations.
Thusly the transfer is subtle and each transfer unique in what is offered and
what is accepted. At this point we may note that this is the cause for the
infinite array of possible energy transfers.
The second energy transfer of which we would speak is the sexual energy
transfer. This takes place upon a non-magical level by all those entities
which vibrate green ray active. It is possible, as in the case of this instrument
which dedicates itself to the service of the one infinite Creator, to further
refine this energy transfer. When the other-self also dedicates itself in service
to the one infinite Creator, the transfer is doubled. Then the amount of
energy transferred is dependent only upon the amount of polarized sexual
energy created and released. There are refinements from this point onward
leading to the realm of the high sexual magic.
In the realm of the mental bodies there are variations of mental energy
transferred. This is, again, dependent upon the knowledge sought and the
knowledge offered. The most common mental energy transfer is that of the
teacher and the pupil. The amount of energy is dependent upon the quality
of this offering upon the part of the teacher, and regards the purity of the
desire to serve, and the quality of information offered and, upon the part of
the student, the purity of the desire to learn and the quality of the mind
vibratory complex which receives knowledge.



                                      163
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 73

Another form of mental energy transfer is that of the listener and the
speaker. When the speaker is experiencing mental/emotional complex
distortions towards anguish, sorrow, or other mental pain, from what we
have said before, you may perhaps garner knowledge of the variations
possible in this transfer.
The spiritual energy transfers are at the heart of all energy transfers as a
knowledge of self and other-self as Creator is paramount, and this is
spiritual work. The varieties of spiritual energy transfer include those things
of which we have spoken this day as we spoke upon the subject of the adept.
Are there any brief queries before we leave this working?
Questioner: Only if there is anything we can do to improve the comfort of
the instrument and the contact, and secondly, is there anything that you
wish not published in today’s session?
Ra: I am Ra. We call your attention to two items. Firstly, it is well that the
candle which spirals 10° each working be never allowed to gutter as this
would cause imbalance in the alignment of the appurtenances in their
protective role for this instrument. Secondly, we might suggest attention to
the neck area so that the cushion upon which it is supported be more
comfortable. This difficulty has abbreviated many workings.
We thank you, my friends, for your conscientiousness and your
fastidiousness with regard to these appurtenances which, as our workings
proceed, seems to be increasing. Secondly, your decisions are completely
your own as to that material which you may wish published from this
working.
I am Ra. I leave you glorying in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      164
           The Law of One, Book III, Session 74
                           October 28, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you first please give me the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Before we get to new material, in the last session there seems to
be a small error that I corrected then having to do with this statement, “no
working comes from it but only through it.” Was this an error in the
transmission? What caused this?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument, while fully open to our narrow-band contact,
at times experiences a sudden strengthening of the distortion which you call
pain. This weakens the contact momentarily. This type of increased
distortion has been occurring in this instrument’s bodily complex with
more frequency in the time period which you may term the previous
fortnight. Although it is not normally a phenomenon which causes
difficulties in transmission, it did so twice in the previous working. Both
times it was necessary to correct or rectify the contact.
Questioner: Could you please describe the trance state? I am somewhat
confused as to how, in a trance, pain can affect the instrument since I was of
the opinion that there would be no feeling of pain by the bodily complex in
the trance state?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The instrument has no awareness of this or
other sensations. However, we of Ra use the yellow-ray activated physical
complex as a channel through which to speak. As the mind/body/spirit
complex of the instrument leaves this physical shell in our keeping it is
finely adjusted to our contact.
However, the distortion which you call pain, when sufficiently severe,
mitigates against proper contact and, when the increased distortion is
violent, can cause the tuning of the channel to waver. This tuning must
then be corrected which we may do as the instrument offers us this
opportunity freely.
Questioner: In a previous session there was a question on the archetypical
mind that was not fully answered. I would like to continue with the answer


                                      165
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 74

to that question. Could you please continue with that, or will it be necessary
for me to read the entire question over again?
Ra: I am Ra. As a general practice it is well to vibrate the query at the same
space/time as the answer is desired. However, in this case it is acceptable to
us that a note be inserted at this point in your recording of these sound
vibratory complexes referring to the location of the query in previous
workings.
(Note: This question was the last question asked in Session #67.)
The query, though thoughtful, is in some degree falling short of the
realization of the nature of the archetypical mind. We may not teach/learn
for any other to the extent that we become learn/teachers. Therefore, we
shall make some general notations upon this interesting subject and allow
the questioner to consider and further refine any queries.
The archetypical mind may be defined as that mind which is peculiar to the
Logos of this planetary sphere. Thusly unlike the great cosmic all-mind, it
contains the material which it pleased the Logos to offer as refinements to
the great cosmic being-ness. The archetypical mind, then, is that which
contains all facets which may affect mind or experience.
The Magician was named as a significant archetype. However, it was not
recognized that this portion of the archetypical mind represents not a
portion of the deep subconscious but the conscious mind and more
especially the will. The archetype called by some the High Priestess, then, is
the corresponding intuitive or subconscious faculty.
Let us observe the entity as it is in relationship to the archetypical mind.
You may consider the possibilities of utilizing the correspondences between
the mind/body/spirit in microcosm and the archetypical mind/body/spirit
closely approaching the Creator. For instance, in your ritual performed to
purify this place you use the term “Ve Geburah.” It is a correct assumption
that this is a portion or aspect of the one infinite Creator. However, there
are various correspondences with the archetypical mind which may be more
and more refined by the adept. “Ve Geburah” is the correspondence of
Michael, of Mars, of the positive, of maleness. “Ve Gedulah” has
correspondences to Jupiter, to femaleness, to the negative, to that portion of
the Tree of Life concerned with Auriel.
We could go forward with more and more refinements of these two entries
into the archetypical mind. We could discuss color correspondences,
relationships with other archetypes, and so forth. This is the work of the
adept, not the teach/learner. We may only suggest that there are systems of
study which may address themselves to the aspects of the archetypical mind
                                      166
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 74

and it is well to choose one and study carefully. It is more nearly well if the
adept go beyond whatever has been written and make such correspondences
that the archetype can be called upon at will.
Questioner: I have a statement here that I am going to make and let you
correct. I see that the disciplines of the personality feed the indigo-ray
energy center and affect the power of the white magician by unblocking the
lower energy centers allowing for the free flow of the upward spiraling light
to reach the indigo center. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Will you please correct me?
Ra: I am Ra. The indigo center is indeed most important for the work of
the adept. However, it cannot, no matter how crystallized, correct to any
extent whatsoever imbalances or blockages in other energy centers. They
must needs be cleared seriatim from red upwards.
Questioner: I’m not sure exactly if I understand this. The question is how
do disciplines of the personality feed the indigo-ray energy center and affect
the power of the white magician? Does that question make sense?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would you answer it please?
Ra: I am Ra. We would be happy to answer this query. We understood the
previous query as being of other import. The indigo ray is the ray of the
adept. There is an identification between the crystallization of that energy
center and the improvement of the working of the mind/body/spirit as it
begins to transcend space/time balancing and to enter the combined realms
of space/time and time/space.
Questioner: Let me see if I have a wrong opinion here of the effect of
disciplines of the personality. I was assuming that the discipline of the
personality to, shall we say, have a balanced attitude toward a single fellow
entity would properly clear and balance, to some extent, the orange-ray
energy center. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot say that you speak incorrectly but merely less than
completely. The disciplined personality, when faced with an other-self, has
all centers balanced according to its unique balance. Thusly the other-self
looks in a mirror seeing its self.
Questioner: The disciplines of the personality are the paramount work of
any who have become consciously aware of the process of evolution. Am I
correct on that statement?
                                     167
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 74

Ra: I am Ra. Quite.
Questioner: What I am trying to get at is how these disciplines affect the
energy centers and the power of the white magician. Will you tell me how
that works?
Ra: I am Ra. The heart of the discipline of the personality is threefold. One,
know your self. Two, accept your self. Three, become the Creator.
The third step is that step which, when accomplished, renders one the most
humble servant of all, transparent in personality and completely able to
know and accept other-selves. In relation to the pursuit of the magical
working the continuing discipline of the personality involves the adept in
knowing its self, accepting its self, and thus clearing the path towards the
great indigo gateway to the Creator. To become the Creator is to become all
that there is. There is, then, no personality in the sense with which the
adept begins its learn/teaching. As the consciousness of the indigo ray
becomes more crystalline, more work may be done; more may be expressed
from intelligent infinity.
Questioner: You stated that a working of service to others has the potential
of alerting a great mass of light strength. Could you describe just exactly
how this works and what the uses of this would be?
Ra: I am Ra. There are sound vibratory complexes which act much like the
dialing of your telephone. When they are appropriately vibrated with
accompanying will and concentration it is as though many upon your
metaphysical or inner planes received a telephone call. This call they answer
by their attention to your working.
Questioner: There are many of these. The ones most obvious in our society
are those used in the church rather than those used by the magical adept.
What is the difference in the effect in those used in our various churches
and those specifically magical incantations used by the adept?
Ra: I am Ra. If all in your churches were adepts consciously full of will, of
seeking, of concentration, of conscious knowledge of the calling, there
would be no difference. The efficacy of the calling is a function of the
magical qualities of those who call; that is, their desire to seek the altered
state of consciousness desired.
Questioner: In selecting the protective ritual we finally agreed upon the
Banishing Ritual of the Lesser Pentagram. I assume that these sound
vibratory complexes are of the type of which you speak for the alerting of
those on the inner planes. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
                                      168
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 74

Questioner: If we had constructed a ritual of our own with words used for
the first time in this sequence of protection what would have been the
relative merit of this with respect to the ritual that we chose?
Ra: I am Ra. It would be less. In constructing ritual it is well to study the
body of written work which is available for names of positive or service to
others power are available.
Questioner: I will make an analogy to the loudness of the ringing of the
telephone in using the ritual as the efficiency of the practitioners using the
ritual. I see several things affecting the efficiency of the ritual: first, the
desire of the practitioners to serve, their ability to invoke the magical
personality, their ability to visualize while performing the ritual, and let me
ask you as to the relative importance of those items and how each may be
intensified?
Ra: I am Ra. This query borders upon over-specificity. It is most important
for the adept to feel its own growth as teach/learner.
We may only say that you correctly surmise the paramount import of the
magical personality. This is a study in itself. With the appropriate emotional
will, polarity, and purity, work may be done with or without proper sound
vibration complexes. However, there is no need for the blunt instrument
when the scalpel is available.
Questioner: I assume that the reason that the rituals that have been used
previously are of effect is that these words have built a bias in consciousness
of those who have worked in these areas so that those who are of a
distortion of mind that we seek will respond to imprint in consciousness of
this series of words. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is, to a great extent, correct. The exception is the
sounding of some of what you call your Hebrew and some of what you call
you Sanskrit vowels. These sound vibration complexes have power before
time and space and represent configurations of light which built all that
there is.
Questioner: Why do these sounds have this property?
Ra: I am Ra. The correspondence in vibratory complex is mathematical.
At this time we have enough transferred energy for one full query.
Questioner: How did the users of these sounds, Sanskrit and Hebrew,
determine what these sounds were?



                                      169
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 74

Ra: I am Ra. In the case of the Hebrew that entity known as Yahweh aided
this knowledge through impression upon the material of genetic coding
which became language, as you call it.
In the case of Sanskrit the sound vibrations are pure due to the lack of
previous, what you call, alphabet or letter-naming. Thus the sound
vibration complexes seemed to fall into place as from the Logos. This was a
more, shall we say, natural or unaided situation or process.
We would at this time make note of the incident in the previous working
where our contact was incorrectly placed for a short period and was then
corrected. In the exercise of the fire you may see the initial spiral clockwise
from the green-ray energy center, through the shoulders and head, then
through the elbows, then to the left hand. The channel had been corrected
before the remainder of this answer was completed.
Is there a brief query at this time?
Questioner: Is there anything that we could do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. The instrument continues in some pain, as you call
this distortion. The neck area remains most distorted although the changes
have been, to a small degree, helpful. The alignments are good.
We would leave you now, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, glorying and rejoicing in the power and in
the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                       170
            The Law of One, Book III, Session 75
                             October 31, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: The instrument would like to know why twice during the
“Benedictus” portion of the music she sang in a group concert that she
experienced what she believes to be a psychic attack?
                                           2
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a minor query. We shall first remove the notations
which are minor. In the vibrating, which you call singing, of the portion of
what this instrument hallows as the Mass which immediately precedes that
which is the chink called the “Hosanna” there is an amount of physical
exertion required that is exhausting to any entity. This portion of which we
speak is termed the “Sanctus.” We come now to the matter of interest.
                              3
When the entity Jehoshuah decided to return to the location called
Jerusalem for the holy days of its people it turned from work mixing love
and wisdom and embraced martyrdom which is the work of love without
wisdom.
The “Hosanna,” as it is termed, and the following ”Benedictus,” is that
which is the written summation of what was shouted as Jehoshuah came
into the place of its martyrdom. The general acceptance of this shout,
“Hosanna to the son of David! Hosanna in the highest! Blessed is he who
comes in the name of the Lord!” by that which is called the church has been
a misstatement, an occurrence which has been, perhaps, unfortunate for it is
more distorted than much of the so-called Mass.
There were two factions present to greet Jehoshuah, firstly, a small group of
those which hoped for an earthly king. However, Jehoshuah rode upon an
ass stating by its very demeanor that it was no earthly king and wished no
fight with Roman or Sadducee.



2
  It may seem that there is an excessive amount of personal and rather melodramatic
material about psychic attack included here. We considered long and hard before
deciding not to delete it. Our reason—Ra seems to suggest that any “light worker”
will, if successful in this work, attract some sort of negatively oriented greeting.
Therefore, we wish to share our experiences and Ra’s discussion of them, in hopes
that the information might be helpful.
3
  Ra has previously identified this name as the name of Jesus in biblical times.

                                        171
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

The greater number were those which had been instructed by rabbi and
elder to make jest of this entity, for those of the hierarchy feared this entity
who seemed to be one of them, giving respect to their laws and then, in
their eyes, betraying those time-honored laws and taking the people with it.
The chink for this instrument is this subtle situation which echoes down
through your space/time and, more than this, the place the “Hosanna”
holds as the harbinger of that turning to martyrdom. We may speak only
generally here. The instrument did not experience the full force of the
greeting which it correctly identified during the “Hosanna” due to the
intense concentration necessary to vibrate its portion of that composition.
However, the “Benedictus” in this particular rendition of these words is
vibrated by one entity. Thus the instrument relaxed its concentration and
was immediately open to the fuller greeting.
Questioner: The chink then, as I understand it, was originally created by
the decision of Jesus to take the path of martyrdom? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is, in relation to this instrument, quite correct. It is aware
of certain over-balances towards love, even to martyrdom but has not yet, to
any significant degree, balanced these distortions. We do not imply that this
course of unbridled compassion has any fault but affirm its perfection. It is
an example of love which has served as beacon to many.
For those who seek further, the consequences of martyrdom must be
considered, for in martyrdom lies the end of the opportunity, in the density
of the martyr, to offer love and light. Each entity must seek its deepest path.
Questioner: Let me see, then, if I understand how the Orion entity finds a
chink in this distortion. The entity identifying in any amount toward
martyrdom is then open by its free will to the aid of the Orion group to
make it a martyr. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct only in the quite specialized position in which
the instrument finds itself, that is, of being involved in and dedicated to
work which is magical or extremely polarized in nature. This group entered
this work with polarity but virtual innocence as to the magical nature of this
polarity. That it is beginning to discover.
Questioner: How was the Orion entity able to act through this linkage of
the “Hosanna”? Was this simply because of mental distortions of the
instrument at this period of time, because of that suggested by the music, or
was it a more physical or metaphysical link from the time of Christ?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, the latter supposition is false. This entity is not linked
with the entity, Jehoshuah. Secondly, there is a most unique circumstance.

                                       172
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

There is an entity which has attracted the attention of an Orion light being.
This is extremely rare.
This entity has an intense devotion to the teachings and example of the one
it calls Jesus. This entity then vibrates in song a most demanding version,
called The Mass in B Minor by Bach, of this exemplary votive complex of
sound vibrations. The entity is consciously identifying with each part of this
Mass. Only thusly was the chink made available. As you can see, it is not an
ordinary occurrence and would not have happened had any ingredient been
left out: exhaustion, bias in the belief complexes, attention from an Orion
entity, and the metaphysical nature of that particular set of words.
Questioner: What was the Orion entity’s objective with respect to the
entity you spoke of who, in a demanding manner, sings the Mass?
Ra: I am Ra. The Orion entity wishes to remove the instrument.
Questioner: Is this a fourth- or a fifth-density?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is being greeted by a fifth-density entity
which has lost some polarity due to its lack of dictatorship over the
disposition of the instrument’s mind/body/spirit or its yellow-ray activated
physical complex.
Questioner: You are speaking of this other person now who sang in the
Mass? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: I think there was a little miscommunication here. I was asking
about the other person who sings the Mass in creating this chink that was
also greeted by an Orion entity, and my question was what density is the
Orion entity who greets the other person who sings the Mass?
Ra: I am Ra. We did not speak of any entity but the instrument.
Questioner: OK. I misunderstood. I thought you were speaking of someone
else in the singing group who had been identified with the singing. The
entire time we were speaking we were speaking only of the instrument? Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I am sorry for my confusion. Sometimes, as you say, sound
vibration complexes are not very adequate.
The answer to this next question probably has to do with our distorted view
of time, but as I see it, Wanderers in this density who come from the fifth-
density or sixth-density should already be of a relatively high degree of
                                      173
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

adeptness and they must follow a slightly different path back to the
adeptness that they once had in a higher density and get as close to it as they
can in the third-density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is less than perfectly focused. We shall address the
subject in general.
There are many Wanderers whom you may call adepts who do no conscious
work in the present incarnation. It is a matter of attention. One may be a
fine catcher of your game sphere, but if the eye is not turned as this sphere
is tossed then perchance it will pass the entity by. If it turned its eyes upon
the sphere, catching would be easy. In the case of Wanderers which seek to
recapitulate the degree of adeptness which each had acquired previous to
this life experience, we may note that even after the forgetting process has
been penetrated there is still the yellow activated body which does not
respond as does the adept which is of a green- or blue-ray activated body.
Thusly, you may see the inevitability of frustrations and confusion due to
the inherent difficulties of manipulating the finer forces of consciousness
through the chemical apparatus of the yellow-ray activated body.
Questioner: You probably can’t answer this, but are there any suggestions
that you could give with respect to the instrument’s coming hospital
experience that could be of benefit for her?
Ra: I am Ra. We may make one suggestion and leave the remainder with
the Creator. It is well for each to realize its self as the Creator. Thusly each
may support each including the support of self by humble love of self as
Creator.
Questioner: You spoke in a previous session about certain Hebrew and
Sanskrit sound vibratory complexes being powerful because they were
mathematically related to that which was the creation. Could you expand
on this understanding as to how these are linked?
Ra: I am Ra. As we previously stated the linkage is mathematical or that of
the ratio you may consider musical. There are those whose mind complex
activities would attempt to resolve this mathematical ratio but at present the
coloration of the intoned vowel is part of the vibration which cannot be
accurately measured. However, it is equivalent to types of rotation of your
primary material particles.
Questioner: If these sounds are precisely vibrated then what effect or use,
with respect to the purposes of the adept, would they have?
Ra: I am Ra. You may consider the concept of sympathetic resonance.
When certain sounds are correctly vibrated, the creation sings.

                                       174
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

Questioner: Would these sounds, then, be of a musical nature in that there
would be a musical arrangement of many different sound vibrations, or
would this apply to just one single note? Which would it apply more to?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is not easily answered. In some cases only the
intoned vowel has effect. In other cases, most notably Sanskrit
combinations, the selection of harmonic intervals is also of resonant nature.
Questioner: Then would the adept use this resonant quality to become
more one with the creation and, therefore, attain his objective in that way?
Ra: I am Ra. It would be perhaps more accurate to state that in this
circumstance the creation becomes more and more contained within the
practitioner. The balance of your query is correct.
Questioner: Could you tell me the musical name of the notes to be intoned
that are of this quality?
Ra: I am Ra. We may not.
Questioner: I didn’t think that you could, but I thought it wouldn’t hurt to
ask.
Then I assume that these must be sought out and determined by empirical
observation of their effect by the seeker. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. As your seeking continues there will
be added to empirical data that acuity of sensibility which continued
working in the ways of the adept offers.
Questioner: Is the exercise of the fire best for the instrument, or is there
anything better that we could do other than the things that you have
already suggested to aid the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue as you are at present. We cannot speak of the future
as we may then affect it, but there is a great probability/possibility if you
follow the path which you now tread that more efficacious methods for the
entire group will be established.
Questioner: You mentioned in an earlier session that the hair was an
antennae. Could you expand on that statement as to how that works?
Ra: I am Ra. It is difficult to so do due to the metaphysical nature of this
antennae-effect. Your physics are concerned with measurements in your
physical complex of experience. The metaphysical nature of the contact of
those in time/space is such that the hair, as it has significant length,
becomes as a type of electrical battery which stays charged and tuned and is
then able to aid contact even when there are small anomalies in the contact.

                                      175
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

Questioner: Is there an optimum length of hair for this aid?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no outer limit on length but the, shall we say, inner
limit is approximately four to four and one-half inches depending upon the
strength of the contact and the nature of the instrument.
Questioner: May anyone in third density accomplish some degree of
healing if they have the proper will, desire, and polarity, or is there a
minimal balance of the energy centers of the healer that is also necessary?
Ra: I am Ra. Any entity may at any time instantaneously clear and balance
its energy centers. Thus in many cases those normally quite blocked,
weakened, and distorted may, through love and strength of will, become
healers momentarily. To be a healer by nature one must indeed train its self
in the disciplines of the personality.
Questioner: How does the use of the magical ritual invoking the magical
personality aid the mind/body/spirit complex totality? Could you expand
on the answer that you gave in the last session with respect to that?
Ra: I am Ra. When the magical personality is properly and efficaciously
invoked the self has invoked its higher self. Thus a bridge betwixt
space/time and time/space is made and the sixth-density magical personality
experiences directly the third-density catalyst for the duration of the
working. It is most central to deliberately take off the magical personality
after the working in order that the higher self resume its appropriate
configuration as analog to the space/time mind/body/spirit.
Questioner: Then you are saying that the act, signal, or key for the invoking
of the magical personality which is the putting of something on or a gesture
should also be as carefully taken off to reverse the gesture perhaps at the end
of the invocation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. It should be fastidiously accomplished either in
mind or by gesture as well if this is of significant aid.
Questioner: Now in the invocation of the magical personality it is not
necessarily effective for the neophyte. Is there a point at which there is a
definite quantum change and that then the magical personality does reside
in the neophyte, or can it be done in small degrees or percentages of magical
personality as the neophyte becomes more adept?
Ra: I am Ra. The latter is correct.
Questioner: The three aspects of the magical personality are stated to be
power, love, and wisdom. Is this correct and are these the only primary
aspects of the magical personality?

                                      176
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

Ra: I am Ra. The three aspects of the magical personality, power, love, and
wisdom, are so called in order that attention be paid to each aspect in
developing the basic tool of the adept; that is, its self. It is by no means a
personality of three aspects. It is a being of unity, a being of sixth density,
and equivalent to what you call your higher self and at the same time is a
personality enormously rich in variety of experience and subtlety of
emotion.
The three aspects are given that the neophyte not abuse the tools of its trade
but rather approach those tools balanced in the center of love and wisdom
and thus seeking power in order to serve.
Questioner: Then is it correct that a good sequence for the developing of
the magical personality would be alternate meditations first on power, and
then a meditation on love, and then a meditation on wisdom and then to
continue cycling that way?
Ra: I am Ra. This is indeed an appropriate technique. In this particular
group there is an additional aid in that each entity manifests one of these
qualities in a manner which approaches the archetype. Thusly visualization
may be personalized and much love and support within the group
generated.
Questioner: You made the statement in a previous session that the true
adept lives more and more as it is. Will you explain and expand more upon
that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. Each entity is the Creator. The entity, as it becomes more and
more conscious of its self, gradually comes to the turning point at which it
determines to seek either in service to others or in service to self. The seeker
becomes the adept when it has balanced with minimal adequacy the energy
centers red, orange, yellow, and blue with the addition of the green for the
positive, thus moving into indigo work.
The adept then begins to do less of the preliminary or outer work, having to
do with function, and begins to effect the inner work which has to do with
being. As the adept becomes a more and more consciously crystallized entity
it gradually manifests more and more of that which it always has been since
before time; that is, the one infinite Creator.
This instrument begins to show rapid distortion towards increase of pain.
We, therefore, would offer time for any brief query before we leave this
working.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
                                      177
                The Law of One, Book III, Session 75

Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. The alignments are well.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      178
