The Law Of One: Book IV
  THE RA MATERIAL
         By Ra,
An Humble Messenger Of
    The Law Of One
Copyright © 1982 by L/L Research which is a subsidiary of the Rock Creek
Research & Development Laboratories, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or used in any
forms or by any means—graphic, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying or information storage and retrieval systems—without written
permission from the copyright holder.
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 90-72156
ISBN: 0-945007-04-3
L/L Research
P.O. Box 5195
Louisville, KY 40255-0195
                    Table of Contents
Foreword                                   4
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76       10
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77       17
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78       24
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79       34
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80       43
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81       50
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82       58
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83      66
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84       74
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85       81
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86       87
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87       94
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88     102
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89     110
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90     120
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91     128
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92     136
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93     145
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94      152
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95      158
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96     167
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97     172
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 99     177
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 100     181
The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103     185
Note To Our Readers                     190
A Note About the Tarot Cards             191
The Major Arcana                        192




                               iii
                               Foreword
On January 15, 1981, our research group started receiving a communication
from the social memory complex, Ra. From this communication
precipitated the Law of One and some of the distortions of the Law of One.
The pages of this book contain an exact transcript, edited only to remove
some personal material, of the communications received in Sessions 76
through 103 with Ra.
To a certain extent this material presupposes a point of view which we have
developed in the course of many years’ study of the UFO phenomenon. If
you are not familiar with our previous work, a reading of our book, Secrets
of the UFO, might prove helpful in understanding the present material.
Also, as you can see from this book’s title, there are 75 previous sessions
with Ra which were collected in The Law of One, Books One, Two, and
Three. If at all possible, it is good to begin with the beginning of this
material, as later concepts build upon previous concepts. All these volumes
are available from us by mail.
Those who gained familiarity with The Law of One through the mass
market publication of that volume under the title, The Ra Material, may be
assured that the substantial introduction contained in that volume
duplicates the subject matter contained in Secrets of the UFO, although
Secrets of the UFO may still be interesting to you.
Book Four of The Law of One is a beginning in the examination of the
nature and the proper metaphysical use of the archetypical mind. The
archetypical mind is the mind of the Logos, the blueprint used to make the
creation and the means by which we evolve in mind, body and spirit. Ra
stated that the archetypical mind could best be studied by one of three
methods: the tarot, astrology, or the Tree of Life, which is also known as
white ceremonial magic. We decided to investigate the archetypical mind by
delving into the tarot, more especially the twenty-two images of the Major
Arcana. In Book Four we work primarily with the first seven cards, which
are archetypes for the structure of the mind. An overview of all the tarot’s
twenty-two archetypes is also sought.
Any sensible consideration of a contact such as this would yield the
conclusion that if the contact were valid, we would at some point begin
receiving material the complete basis of which was not familiar to us. This
has happened in Book Four. As you may see in the questioning, we
scrambled as best we could throughout the entire volume in an attempt to
keep up with the information which we were receiving and to formulate

                                      4
                                 Foreword

reasonable questions. Even though our session schedule was relaxed, and the
intervening time was used for study, we are aware that the questioning in
this volume is more scattered than in the first three volumes of Ra sessions.
We know of no solution to our own lack of knowledge and are at least
confident that we cannot outdistance the reader, for we knew no more than
you before we asked each question!
We do feel that it would be helpful if we included some information about
the tarot and its general terminology and compared that with a general
outline of the tarot from Ra’s view-point, the viewpoint which Ra shared
with the Egyptians so many years ago. The following comparison deals only
with the twenty-two Major Arcana since it was only these “concept
complexes” which were used by Ra, and which were later drawn by
Egyptian priests, to describe the process of the evolution of the mind, the
body, and the spirit. The Court Arcana and the Minor Arcana were of other
influences and were concerned primarily with the astrological approach to
this study. Each card is described first by its Arcanum number, then by
traditional terminology, and thirdly by Ra’s terminology.
The cards upon which we originally questioned were not available for
reprinting, so we have reproduced here the Major Arcana of the deck most
closely resembling our first deck. These images are to be found in George
Fathman’s, The Royal Road, A Study In The Egyptian Tarot; Key To Sacred
Numbers And Symbols. Eagle Point, Oregon, 1951, Life Research
Foundation.
As you can see, the first seven cards of the Major Arcana were designed to
describe the evolution of the mind, the second seven, the evolution of the
body, and the third seven, the evolution of the spirit. Arcanum Number
XXII is called The Choice, and the choice spoken of is the central choice
each conscious seeker or adept makes as it strives to master the lessons of the
third-density experience to seek in service to others or in service to self.
For more information about the tarot deck used for questioning, see A Note
about the Tarot Cards on page 191.




                                       5
                                 Foreword



                           Arcanum Number I
                           The Magician
                           Matrix of the Mind



                              Arcanum Number II
                                 The High Priestess
                            Potentiator of the Mind




                           Arcanum Number III
                           The Empress
                           Catalyst of the Mind



                              Arcanum Number IV
                                      The Emperor
                             Experience of the Mind




 Arcanum Number V           Arcanum Number VI           Arcanum Number VII
    The Heirophant         The Lovers or Two Paths           The Chariot
Significator of the Mind   Transformation of the Mind   Great Way of the Mind




                                       6
                                Foreword



                           Arcanum Number VIII
                           Justice or Balance
                           Matrix of the Body



                              Arcanum Number IX
                                Wisdom or the Sage
                             Potentiator of the Body




                           Arcanum Number X
                           Wheel of Fortune
                           Catalyst of the Body



                              Arcanum Number XI
                                   The Enchantress
                             Experience of the Body




 Arcanum Number XII         Arcanum Number XIII         Arcanum Number XIV
The Hanged Man or Martyr           Death                    The Alchemist
Significator of the Body   Transformation of the Body   Great Way of the Body




                                       7
                                   Foreword



                             Arcanum Number XV
                             The Devil
                             Matrix of the Spirit



                              Arcanum Number XVI
                              Lightning Struck Tower
                              Potentiator of the Spirit




                             Arcanum Number XVII
                             The Star or Hope
                             Catalyst of the Spirit



                             Arcanum Number XVIII
                                          The Moon
                              Experience of the Spirit




Arcanum Number XIX            Arcanum Number XX             Arcanum Number XXI
        The Sun                    Judgment                       The World
Significator of the Spirit   Transformation of the Spirit   Great Way of the Spirit




                                          8
                                Foreword

                            Arcanum Number XXII
                                  The Fool
                                 The Choice




One of the primary discoveries in Book Four is the concept and purpose of
the “veil of forgetting” which exists between the conscious and unconscious
minds in our present third-density experience. Third densities closer to the
center of our galaxy apparently did not have such a veil and, therefore, did
not forget any event in any incarnation. This condition simplified each
entity’s experience and also the nature of that archetypical mind. Readers,
therefore, should be aware that the questioning focuses on both pre-veil and
post-veiling experiences and the archetypical minds of both types of
experience in order to get a better understanding of our current veiled
experience in the third-density of this octave of creation.
As a result of our questioning we have drawn our own images, the first
seven of which may be found at the back of this volume.
The Ra contact continued for 106 sessions which were printed into four
books in The Law of One series. They are available at your local bookstore
or from us. If you wish to receive our quarterly newsletter, in which the best
of our current channeling is published, please request that you be put on
our mailing list.
L/L Research
Don Elkins
Carla L. Rueckert
James A. McCarty
P.O. Box 5195
Louisville, KY 40255-0195
July 8, 1983

                                      9
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76
                           February 3, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me an indication of the condition of
the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is in a state of physical complex bankruptcy
which has existed for some of the measure you call time. The vital energies
are normal with a strong spiritual complex counterpart and will lending
substance to the mind/body/spirit complex energy levels.
Questioner: Will our continued communication with Ra be deleterious to
the physical energies of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. We may answer in two modes. Firstly, if the instrument were
thusly dedicated to this use with no transfer of energy of physical complex
nature it would begin to call upon the vital energy itself and this, done in
any substantive measure, is actively deleterious to a mind/body/spirit
complex if that complex wishes further experience in the illusion which it
now distorts.
Secondly, if care is taken, firstly, to monitor the outer parameters of the
instrument, then to transfer physical energy by sexual transfer, by magical
protection, and, lastly, by the energetic displacements of thought-forms
energizing the instrument during contact there is no difficulty in that there
is no worsening of the instrument’s mind/body/spirit complex distortions of
strength/weakness.
It is to be noted that the instrument, by dedicating itself to this service,
attracts greetings of which you are aware. These are inconvenient but, with
care taken, need not be lastingly deleterious either to the instrument or the
contact.
Questioner: Of the three things that you mentioned that we could do for
the instrument’s benefit, would you clarify the last one? I didn’t quite
understand what you meant.
Ra: I am Ra. As the entity which you are allows its being to empathize with
any other being, so then it may choose to share with the other-self those
energies which may be salubrious to the other-self. The mechanism of these
energy transfers is the thought or, more precisely, the thought-form for any


                                      10
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

thought is a form or symbol or thing that is an object seen in time/space
reference.
Questioner: Has our use of the Banishing Ritual of the Lesser Pentagram
been of any value and what is its effect?
Ra: I am Ra. This group’s use of the Banishing Ritual of the Lesser
Pentagram has been increasingly efficacious. Its effect is purification,
cleansing, and protection of the place of working.
The efficacy of this ritual is only beginning to be, shall we say, at the lower
limits of the truly magical. In doing the working those aspiring to
adepthood have done the equivalent of beginning the schoolwork, many
grades ahead. For the intelligent student this is not to be discouraged; rather
to be encouraged is the homework, the reading, the writing, the arithmetic,
as you might metaphorically call the elementary steps towards the study of
being. It is the being that informs the working, not the working that
informs the being. Therefore, we may leave you to the work you have
begun.
Questioner: Would it be beneficial for us to perform the banishing ritual
more in this room?
Ra: I am Ra. It is beneficial to regularly work in this place.
Questioner: I am sorry that we have had such a long delay between the last
session and this one. It couldn’t be helped I guess. Could you please tell me
the origin of the tarot?
Ra: I am Ra. The origin of this system of study and divination is twofold:
firstly, there is that influence which, coming in a distorted fashion from
those who were priests attempting to teach the Law of One in Egypt, gave
form to the understanding, if you will pardon the misnomer, which they
had received. These forms were then made a regular portion of the
learn/teachings of an initiate. The second influence is that of those entities
in the lands you call Ur, Chaldea, and Mesopotamia who, from old, had
received the, shall we say, data for which they called having to do with the
heavens. Thusly we find two methods of divination being melded into one
with uneven results; the, as you call it, astrology and the form being
combined to suggest what you might call the correspondences which are
typical of the distortions you may see as attempts to view archetypes.
Questioner: Then am I correct in assuming that the priests of Egypt, in
attempting to convert knowledge that they had received initially from Ra
into understandable symbology, constructed and initiated the concept of
the tarot? Is this correct?

                                       11
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct with the addition of the Sumerian influence.
Questioner: Were Ra’s teachings focusing on the archetypes for this Logos
and the methods of achieving a very close approach to the archetypical
configuration? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct without being true. We, of Ra, are humble
messengers of the Law of One. We seek to teach/learn this single law.
During the space/time of the Egyptian teach/learning we worked to bring
the mind complex, the body complex, and the spirit complex into an
initiated state in which the entity could contact intelligent energy and so
become teach/learner itself so that healing and the fruits of study could be
offered to all. The study of the roots of mind is a portion of the vivification
of the mind complex and, as we have noted, the thorough study of the
portion of the roots of mind called archetypical is an interesting and
necessary portion of the process as a whole.
Questioner: Is there, in Ra’s opinion, any present day value for the use of
the tarot as an aid in the evolutionary process?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall repeat information. It is appropriate to study one
form of constructed and organized distortion of the archetypical mind in
depth in order to arrive at the position of being able to become and to
experience archetypes at will. You have three basic choices. You may choose
astrology, the twelve signs, as you call these portions of your planet’s energy
web, and what has been called the ten planets. You may choose the tarot
with its twenty-two so-called Major Arcana. You may choose the study of
the so-called Tree of Life with its ten Sephiroth and the twenty-two
relationships between the stations.
It is well to investigate each discipline, not as a dilettante, but as one who
seeks the touchstone, one who wishes to feel the pull of the magnet. One of
these studies will be more attractive to the seeker. Let the seeker, then,
investigate the archetypical mind using, basically, one of these three
disciplines. After a period of study, the discipline mastered sufficiently, the
seeker may then complete the more important step: that is, the moving
beyond the written in order to express in an unique fashion its
understanding, if you may again pardon the noun, of the archetypical mind.
Questioner: Would I be correct in saying that the archetypes of this
particular Logos are somewhat unique with respect to the rest of the
creation? The systems of study that we have just talked about would not
translate quickly or easily in other parts of the creation. This is a very
difficult question to state. Could you clear that up for me?


                                       12
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

Ra: I am Ra. We may draw from the welter of statement which you offer
the question we believe you ask. Please requestion if we have mistaken your
query. The archetypical mind is that mind which is peculiar to the Logos
under which influence you are at this space/time distorting your
experiences. There is no other Logos the archetypical mind of which would
be the same any more than the stars would appear the same from another
planet in another galaxy. You may correctly infer that the closer Logoi are
indeed closer in archetypes.
Questioner: Since Ra evolved initially on Venus Ra is of the same
archetypical origin as that which we experience here. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: But I am assuming that the concepts of the tarot and the
magical concepts of the Tree of Life, etc. were not in use by Ra. I suspect,
possibly, some form of astrology was a previous Ra concept. This is just a
guess. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. To express Ra’s methods of study of the archetypical mind
under the system of distortions which we enjoyed would be to skew your
own judgment of that which is appropriate for the system of distortions
forming the conditions in which you learn/teach. Therefore, we must
invoke the Law of Confusion.
Questioner: I am going to ask some questions now that may be a little off
the center of what we are trying to do. I’m not sure because I’m trying to,
with these questions, unscramble something that I consider very basic to
what we are doing. Please forgive my lack of ability in questioning since this
is a difficult concept for me.
Could you give me an idea of the length of the first and second densities as
they occurred for this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no method of estimation of the time/space before
timelessness gave way in your first density. To the beginnings of your time,
the measurement would be vast and yet this vastness is meaningless. Upon
the entry into the constructed space/time your first density spanned a bridge
of space/time and time/space of perhaps two billion of your years.
Second density is more easily estimated and represents your longest density
in terms of the span of space/time. We may estimate that time as
approximately 4. 6 billion years. These approximations are exceedingly
rough due to the somewhat uneven development which is characteristic of
creations which are built upon the foundation stone of free will.


                                      13
                   The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

Questioner: Did you state that second density was 4.6 billion years? B, b-i-
l? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then we have a third density that is, comparatively speaking,
the twinkling of an eye, the snap of a finger in time compared to the others.
Why is the third density cycled so extremely rapidly compared to the first
and second?
Ra: I am Ra. The third density is a choice.
Questioner: Third density, then, compared to the rest of the densities, all of
them, is nothing but a uniquely short period of what we consider to be time
and is for the purpose of this choice.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct. The prelude to choice must
encompass the laying of the foundation, the establishment of the illusion
and the viability of that which can be made spiritually viable. The
remainder of the densities is continuous refining of the choice. This also is
greatly lengthened, as you would use the term. The choice is, as you put it,
the work of a moment but is the axis upon which the creation turns.
Questioner: Is this third-density choice the same throughout all of the
creation of which you are aware?
Ra: I am Ra. We are aware of creations in which third density is lengthier
and more space/time is given to the choosing. However, the proportions
remain the same, the dimensions all being somewhat etiolated and
weakened by the Logos to have a variant experience of the Creator. This
creation is seen by us to be quite vivid.
Questioner: I didn’t understand what you meant by what you said “as seen
by you to be quite vivid.” What did you mean?
Ra: I am Ra. This creation is somewhat more condensed by its Logos than
some other Logoi have chosen. Thus each experience of the Creator by the
Creator in this system of distortions is, relatively speaking, more bright or,
as we said, vivid.
Questioner: I am assuming that upon entry into third density, for this
planet, disease did not exist in any form. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: What disease or form of disease was there and why did this
exist at the beginning of the third density?
                                      14
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, that which you speak of as disease is a functional
portion the body complex which offers the body complex the opportunity
to cease viability. This is a desirable body complex function. The second
portion of the answer has to do with second-density other-selves of a
microscopic, as you would call it, size which have in some forms long
existed and perform their service by aiding the physical body complex in its
function of ceasing viability at the appropriate space/time.
Questioner: What I am trying to understand is the difference between the
plan of the Logos for these second-density entities and the generation of
what I would guess to be more or less a runaway array of feedback to create
various physical problems to act as catalyst in our present third-density
condition. Could you give me an indication of whether my thinking is
anywhere near right on that?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s physical body complex is becoming more
distorted towards pain. We shall, therefore, speak to this subject as our last
full query of this working. Your query contains some internal confusion
which causes the answer to be perhaps more general than desired. We invite
refinements of the query.
The Logos planned for entities of mind/body/spirit complex to gain
experience until the amount of experience was sufficient for an incarnation.
This varied only slightly from second-density entities whose mind/body
complexes existed for the purpose of experiencing growth and seeking
consciousness. As the third density upon your planet proceeded, as has been
discussed, the need for the physical body complex to cease became more
rapidly approached due to intensified and more rapidly gained catalyst. This
catalyst was not being properly assimilated. Therefore, the, shall we say,
lifetimes needed to be shorter that learning might continue to occur with
the proper rhythm and increment. Thus more and more opportunities have
been offered as your density has progressed for disease. May we ask if there
are further brief queries before we close?
Questioner: I have one question that is possibly of no value. You don’t have
to expand on it, but there is a crystal skull in the possession of a woman
near Toronto. It may be of some value in investigating these
communications with Ra since I think possibly this had some origin from
Ra. Can you tell me anything about that, and then is there anything that we
can do to improve the contact or to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. Although your query is one which uncovers interesting
material we can not answer due to the potential an answer may have for

                                      15
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 76

affecting your actions. The appurtenances are carefully placed and requisite
care taken. We are appreciative. All is well.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, glorying and rejoicing in the power and in the
peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      16
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77
                           February 10, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you please give me an indication of the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Was the instrument under attack just prior to this session?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is there anything that we could do to help protect the
instrument from these attacks prior to the session?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What could we do?
Ra: I am Ra. Your group could refrain from continuing this contact.
Questioner: Is that the only thing that we could do?
Ra: I am Ra. That is the only thing you could do which you are not already
attempting with a whole heart.
Questioner: I have three questions that the instrument asked me to ask
which I will get out of the way first. She wants to know if the preparation
for her hospital experience could be improved if she should ever have to
repeat it?
Ra: I am Ra. All was done well with one exception. The instrument was
instructed to spend space/time contemplating its self as the Creator. This,
done in a more determined fashion, would be beneficial at times when the
mind complex is weakened by severe assaults upon the distortions of the
body complex towards pain. There is no necessity for negative thought-
forms regardless of pain distortions. The elimination of such creates the lack
of possibility for negative elementals and other negative entities to use these
thought-forms to create the worsening of the mind complex deviation from
the normal distortions of cheerfulness/anxiety.
Questioner: The instrument would also like to know if what we call tuning
could be improved during times when we do not communicate with Ra?



                                       17
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

Ra: I am Ra. That which has been stated in regard to the latter question will
suffice to point the way for the present query.
Questioner: Finally, she wishes to know why several days ago her heart rate
went up to 115 per minute and why she had extreme pain in her stomach?
Was that an Orion greeting?
Ra: I am Ra. Although this experience was energized by the Orion group
the events mentioned, as well as others more serious, were proximally
caused by the ingestion of certain foodstuffs in what you call your tablet
form.
Questioner: Can you tell me what these tablets were, specifically?
Ra: I am Ra. We examine this query for the Law of Confusion and find
ourselves close to the boundary, but acceptably so.
The substance which caused the bodily reaction of the heartbeat was called
Pituitone by those which manufacture it. That which caused the difficulty
which seemed to be cramping of the lower abdominal musculature but was,
in fact, more organic in nature was a substance called Spleentone.
This instrument has a physical body complex of complicated balances
which afford it physical existence. Were the view taken that certain
functions and chemicals found in the healthy, as you call it, body complex
are lacking in this one and, therefore, simply must be replenished, the
intake of the many substances which this instrument began would be
appropriate. However, this particular physical vehicle has, for approximately
twenty-five of your years, been vital due to the spirit, the mind, and the will
being harmoniously dedicated to fulfilling the service it chose to offer.
Therefore, physical healing techniques are inappropriate whereas mental
and spiritual healing techniques are beneficial.
Questioner: Is there any technique that we could use that we have not been
using that would be beneficial for the instrument in this case?
Ra: I am Ra. We might suggest, without fractiousness, two. Firstly, let the
instrument remove the possibility of further ingestion of this group of
foodstuffs.
Secondly, each of the group may become aware of the will to a greater
extent. We cannot instruct upon this but merely indicate, as we have
previously, that it is a vital key to the evolution of the mind/body/spirit
complex.
Questioner: Thank you. I would like to go back to the plan of this Logos
for Its creation and examine the philosophical basis that is the foundation
                                       18
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

for what was created in this local creation and the philosophy of the plan for
experience. I am assuming that I am correct in stating that the foundation
for this, as has been stated many times before, is the first distortion. After
that, what was the plan in the philosophical sense?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot reply due to a needed portion of your query which
has been omitted; that is, do we speak of this particular Logos?
Questioner: That is correct. I am asking with respect to this particular sub-
Logos, our sun.
Ra: I am Ra. This query has substance. We shall begin by turning to an
observation of a series of concept complexes of which you are familiar as the
tarot.
The philosophy was to create a foundation, first of mind, then of body, and
then of spiritual complex. Those concept complexes you call the tarot lie
then in three groups of seven: the mind cycle, one through seven; the
physical complex cycle, eight through fourteen; the spiritual complex cycle,
fifteen through twenty-one. The last concept complex may best be termed
The Choice.
Upon the foundation of the transformation of each complex, with free will
guided by the root concepts offered in these cycles, the Logos offered this
density the basic architecture of a building and the constructing and
synthesizing of data culminating in The Choice.
Questioner: Then to condense your statement, I see it meaning that there
are seven basic philosophical foundations for mental experience, seven for
bodily, seven for spiritual, and that these produce the polarization that we
experience sometime during the third-density cycle. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct in that you perceive the content of our prior
statement with accuracy. You are incorrect in that you have no mention of
the, shall we say, location of all of these concept complexes; that is, they
exist within the roots of the mind and it is from this resource that their
guiding influence and leitmotifs 1 may be traced. You may further note that
each foundation is itself not single but a complex of concepts. Furthermore,
there are relationships betwixt mind, body, and spirit of the same location
in octave, for instance: one, eight, fifteen, and relationships within each
octave which are helpful in the pursuit of The Choice by the
mind/body/spirit complex. The Logos under which these foundations stand

1
    leitmotif: Lit: leading motive. In music: A distinguishing theme or melodic
    phrase representing and recurring with a given character, situation, or emotion
    in an opera.

                                         19
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

is one of free will. Thusly the foundations may be seen to have unique facets
and relationships for each mind/body/spirit complex. Only twenty-two,
The Choice, is relatively fixed and single.
Questioner: Then I am probably having a problem with the concept of
time since it appears that the Logos was aware of the polarization choice. It
seems that this choice for polarization at the end of third density is an
important philosophical plan for the experience past third density. Am I
correct in assuming that this process is a process to create the proper or
desired experience that will take place in the creation after third density is
complete?
Ra: I am Ra. These philosophical foundations are those of third density.
Above this density there remains the recognition of the architecture of the
Logos but without the veils which are so integral a part of the process of
making the choice in third density.
Questioner: The specific question that I had was that it seems to me that
the choice was planned to create intense polarization past third density so
that experience would be intense past third density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Given that our interpretation of your sound vibration
complexes is appropriate, this is incorrect. The intensity of fourth density is
that of the refining of the rough-hewn sculpture. This is, indeed, in its own
way, quite intense causing the mind/body/spirit complex to move ever
inward and onward in its quest for fuller expression. However, in third
density the statue is forged in the fire. This is a type of intensity which is
not the property of fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh densities.
Questioner: What I am really attempting to understand, since all of these
twenty-one philosophical bases result in the twenty-second which is The
Choice, is why this choice is so important, why the Logos seems to put so
much emphasis on this choice, and what function this choice of polarity
has, precisely, in the evolution or the experience of that which is created by
the Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. The polarization or choosing of each mind/body/spirit is
necessary for harvestability from third density. The higher densities do their
work due to the polarity gained in this choice.
Questioner: Would it be possible for this work of our density to be
performed if all of the sub-Logoi chose the same polarity in any particular
expression or evolution of a Logos? Let us make the assumption that our
sun created nothing but, through the first distortion, positive polarity.
There was no product except positive polarity. Would work then be done in

                                      20
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

fourth density and higher as a function of only the positive polarization
evolving from the original creation of our sub-Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. Elements of this query illustrate the reason I was unable to
answer your previous question without knowledge of the Logos involved.
To turn to your question, there were Logoi which chose to set the plan for
the activation of mind/body/spirit complexes through each true color body
without recourse to the prior application of free will. It is, to our
knowledge, only in an absence of free will that the conditions of which you
speak obtain. In such a procession of densities you find an extraordinarily
long, as you measure time, third-density; likewise, fourth density. Then, as
the entities begin to see the Creator, there is a very rapid, as you measure
time, procession towards the eighth density. This is due to the fact that one
who knows not, cares not.
Let us illustrate by observing the relative harmony and unchanging quality
of existence in one of your, as you call it, primitive tribes. The entities have
the concepts of lawful and taboo, but the law is inexorable and all events
occur as predestined. There is no concept of right and wrong, good or bad.
It is a culture in monochrome. In this context you may see the one you call
Lucifer as the true light-bringer in that the knowledge of good and evil both
precipitated the mind/body/spirits of this Logos from the Edenic conditions
of constant contentment and also provided the impetus to move, to work
and to learn.
Those Logoi whose creations have been set up without free will have not, in
the feeling of those Logoi, given the Creator the quality and variety of
experience of Itself as have those Logoi which have incorporated free will as
paramount. Thusly you find those Logoi moving through the timeless states
at what you would see as a later space/time to choose the free will character
when elucidating the foundations of each Logos.
Questioner: I guess, under the first distortion, it was the free will of the
Logos to choose to evolve without free will. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Do the Logoi that choose this type of evolution choose both
the service-to-self and the service-to-others path for different Logoi, or do
they choose just one of the paths?
Ra: I am Ra. Those, what you would call, early Logoi which chose lack of
free will foundations, to all extents with no exceptions, founded Logoi of
the service-to-others path. The, shall we say, saga of polarity, its
consequences and limits, were unimagined until experienced.

                                       21
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

Questioner: In other words you are saying that originally the Logoi that did
not choose this free will path did not choose it simply because they had not
conceived of it and that later Logoi, extending the first distortion farther
down through their evolution, experienced it as an outcropping or growth
from that extension of the first distortion. Am I correct in saying that?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then did this particular Logos that we experience plan for this
polarity and know all about it prior to its plan? I suspect that this is what
happened.
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: In that case, as a Logos, you would have an advantage of
selecting the form of acceleration, you might say, of spiritual evolution by
planning what we call the major archetypical philosophical foundations and
planning these as a function of the polarity that would be gained in third
density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is exquisitely correct.
Questioner: In that case, it seems that a thorough knowledge of the precise
nature of these philosophical foundations would be of primary importance
to the study of evolution of mind, body, and spirit, and I would like to
carefully go through each, starting with the mind. Is this agreeable with Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. This is agreeable with two requests which must be made.
Firstly, that an attempt be made to state the student’s grasp of each
archetype. We may then comment. We cannot teach/learn to the extent of
learn/teaching. Secondly, we request that it be constantly kept before the
mind, as the candle before the eye, that each mind/body/spirit complex
shall and should and, indeed, must perceive each archetype, if you use this
convenient term, in its own way. Therefore, you may see that precision is
not the goal; rather the quality of general concept complex perception is the
goal.
Questioner: Now, there are several general concepts that I would like to be
sure that we have clear before going into this process and I will certainly
adhere to the requests that you have just stated.
When our Logos designed this particular evolution of experience It decided
to use a system of which we spoke allowing for polarization through total
free will. How is this different from the Logos that does not do this? I see
the Logos creating the possibility of increase in vibration through the
densities. How are the densities provided for and set by the Logos, if you
can answer this?
                                      22
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 77

Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working. The psychic
attack upon this instrument has, shall we say, left scars which must be
tended, in our own opinion, in order to maintain the instrument.
Let us observe your second density. Many come more rapidly to third
density than others not because of an innate efficiency of catalysis but
because of unusual opportunities for investment. In just such a way those of
fourth density may invest third, those of fifth density may invest fourth.
When fifth density has been obtained the process takes upon itself a
momentum based upon the characteristics of wisdom when applied to
circumstance. The Logos Itself, then, in these instances provides investment
opportunities, if you wish to use that term. May we enquire if there are any
brief queries at this space/time?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do after this contact to increase
the comfort as related to the psychic attack, or is there anything that we can
do to make the instrument more comfortable and to improve the contact in
the present situation?
Ra: I am Ra. The faculties of healing which each has commenced energizing
may be used. The entity may be encouraged to remain motionless for a
period. As it will not appreciate this, we suggest the proper discussion.
The physical appurtenance called the censer was just a degree off, this
having no deeper meaning. We do ask, for reasons having to do with the
physical comfort of the instrument, that you continue in your careful efforts
at alignment. You are conscientious. All is well.
We leave you, my friends, in the glorious love and light of the one Creator.
Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. I am Ra. Adonai.




                                      23
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78
                          February 19, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Was there some problem with the ritual we performed that
made it necessary to perform the ritual twice?
Ra: I am Ra. There was a misstep which created a momentary lapse of
concentration. This was not well.
Questioner: What was the misstep?
Ra: I am Ra. It was a missed footing.
Questioner: Did this have any detrimental effect on the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. Very little. The instrument felt the presence it has come to
associate with cold and spoke. The instrument did the appropriate thing.
Questioner: Could you tell me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex is as previously stated. There is some
slight loss of vital energy. The basic complex distortions are similar to your
previous asking.
Questioner: The instrument would like for me to ask if there is any
problem with her kidneys?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is more complex than its brevity certifies. The
physical complex renal system of this instrument is much damaged. The
time/space equivalent which rules the body complex is without flaw. There
was a serious question, due to psychic attack, as to whether the spiritual
healing of this system would endure. It did so but has the need to be re-
enforced by affirmation of the ascendancy of the spiritual over the apparent
or visible.
When this instrument began ingesting substances designed to heal in a
physical sense, among other things, the renal complex, this instrument was
ceasing the affirmation of healing. Due to this, again, the healing was
weakened. This is of some profound distortion and it would be well for the
instrument to absorb these concepts. We ask your forgiveness for offering
information which may abridge free will, but the dedication of the
instrument is such that it would persevere regardless of its condition, if
possible. Thusly we offer this information that it may persevere with a fuller
distortion towards comfort.
                                        24
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

Questioner: What was the experience that caused the healing of the
time/space kidney?
Ra: I am Ra. This experience was the healing of self by self with the catalyst
of the spiritual healer whom you call Pachita.
Questioner: Thank you. In utilizing the energetic displacements of
thought-forms energizing the instrument during contact most efficiently,
what specifically could we do?
Ra: I am Ra. Each of the support group has an excess of love and light to
offer the instrument during the working. Already each sends to the
instrument love, light, and thoughts of strength of the physical, mental, and
spiritual configurations. These sendings are forms. You may refine these
sendings until the fullest manifestations of love and light are sent into the
energy web of this entity which functions as instrument. Your exact sending
is, in order to be most potent, the creature of your own making.
Questioner: Thank you. I am going to go back to an earlier time, if you
could call it that, in evolution to try to establish a very fundamental base for
some of the concepts that seem to be the foundation of everything that we
experience so that we can more fully examine the basis of our evolution.
I am guessing that in our Milky Way Galaxy (the major galaxy with billions
of stars) that the progress of evolution was from the center outward toward
the rim and that in the early evolution of this galaxy the first distortion was
not extended down past the sub-Logos simply because it was not thought of
or conceived of and that this extension of the first distortion, which created
polarization, was something that occurred in what we would call a later time
as the evolution progressed outward from the center of the galaxy. Am I in
any way correct in this statement?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct.
Questioner: We have the first, second, and third distortions of the Law of
One as free will, love, and light. Am I correct in assuming that the central
core of this major galaxy began to form with the third distortion? Was that
the origin of our Milky Way Galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. In the most basic or teleological sense you are incorrect as the
one infinite Creator is all that there is. In an undistorted seed-form you are
correct in seeing the first manifestation visible to the eye of the body
complex which you inhabit as the third distortion, light, or to use a
technical term, limitless light.



                                       25
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

Questioner: I realize that we are on very difficult ground, you might say, for
precise terminology. It is totally displaced from our system of coordinates
for evaluation in our present system of language.
These early Logoi that formed in the center of the galaxy wished, I assume,
to create a system of experience for the one Creator. Did they then start
with no previous experience or information about how to do this? This is
difficult to ask.
Ra: I am Ra. At the beginning of this creation or, as you may call it, octave
there were those things known which were the harvest of the preceding
octave. About the preceding creation, we know as little as we do of the
octave to come. However, we are aware of those pieces of gathered concept
which were the tools which the Creator had in the knowing of the self.
These tools were of three kinds. Firstly, there was an awareness of the
efficiency for experience of mind, body, and spirit. Secondly, there was an
awareness of the most efficacious nature or, if you will, significator of mind,
body, and spirit. Thirdly, there was the awareness of two aspects of mind, of
body, and of spirit that the significator could use to balance all catalyst. You
may call these two the matrix and the potentiator.
Questioner: Could you elaborate please on the nature and quality of the
matrix and the potentiator?
Ra: I am Ra. In the mind complex the matrix may be described as
consciousness. It has been called the Magician. It is to be noted that of itself
consciousness is unmoved. The potentiator of consciousness is the
unconscious. This encompasses a vast realm of potential in the mind.
In the body the matrix may be seen as Balanced Working or Even
Functioning. Note that here the matrix is always active with no means of
being inactive. The potentiator of the body complex, then, may be called
Wisdom for it is only through judgment that the unceasing activities and
proclivities of the body complex may be experienced in useful modes.
The Matrix of the Spirit is what you may call the Night of the Soul or
Primeval Darkness. Again we have that which is not capable of movement
or work. The potential power of this extremely receptive matrix is such that
the potentiator may be seen as Lightning. In your archetypical system called
the tarot this has been refined into the concept complex of the Lightning
Struck Tower. However, the original potentiator was light in its sudden and
fiery form; that is, the lightning itself.
Questioner: Would you elucidate with respect to the significator you spoke
of?

                                      26
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

Ra: I am Ra. The original significators may undifferentiatedly be termed the
mind, the body, and the spirit.
Questioner: Then we have, at the beginning of this galactic evolution, an
archetypical mind that is the product of the previous octave which this
galaxy then used as and acts upon under the first distortion so as to allow
for what we experience as polarity. Was there any concept of polarity carried
through from the previous octave in the sense of service-to-others or service-
to-self polarity?
Ra: I am Ra. There was polarity in the sense of the mover and the moved.
There was no polarity in the sense of service-to-self and service-to-others.
Questioner: Then the first experiences, as you say, were in monochrome.
Was the concept of the seven densities of vibration with the evolutionary
process taking place in discrete densities carried through from the previous
octave?
Ra: I am Ra. To the limits of our knowledge, which are narrow, the ways of
the octave are without time; that is, there are seven densities in each
creation infinitely.
Questioner: Then I am assuming that the central suns of our galaxy, in
starting the evolutionary process in this galaxy, provided for, in their plans,
the refinement of consciousness through the densities just as we experience
it here. However, they did not conceive of the polarization of consciousness
with respect to service-to-self and service-to-others. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Why do the densities have the qualities that they have? You
have named the densities with respect to their qualities, the next density
being that of love and so on. Can you tell me why these qualities exist in
that form? Is it possible to answer that question?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible.
Questioner: Will you please answer that?
Ra: I am Ra. The nature of the vibratory range peculiar to each quantum of
the octave is such that the characteristics of it may be described with the
same certainty with which you perceive a color with your optical apparatus
if it is functioning properly.
Questioner: So the original evolution then was planned by the Logos but
the first distortion was not extended to the product. At some point this first
distortion was extended and the first service-to-self polarity emerged. Is this
correct and if so, could you tell me the history of this process of emergence?
                                      27
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

Ra: I am Ra. As proem let me state that the Logoi always conceived of
themselves as offering free will to the sub-Logoi in their care. The sub-Logoi
had freedom to experience and experiment with consciousness, the
experiences of the body, and the illumination of the spirit. That having
been said, we shall speak to the point of your query.
The first Logos to instill what you now see as free will, in the full sense, in
its sub-Logoi came to this creation due to contemplation in depth of the
concepts or possibilities of conceptualizations of what we have called the
significators. The Logos posited the possibility of the mind, the body, and
the spirit as being complex. In order for the significator to be what it is not,
it then must be granted the free will of the Creator. This set in motion a
quite lengthy, in your terms, series of Logos’s improving or distilling this
seed thought. The key was the significator becoming a complex.
Questioner: Then our particular Logos, when it created Its own particular
creation, was at some point far down the evolutionary spiral of the
experiment with the significator becoming what it was not and, therefore, I
am assuming, was primarily concerned in designing the archetypes in such a
way that they would create the acceleration of this polarization. Is this in
any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We would only comment briefly. It is generally correct. You
may fruitfully view each Logos and its design as the Creator experiencing
Itself. The seed concept of the significator being a complex introduces two
things: firstly, the Creator against Creator in one sub-Logos in what you
may call dynamic tension; secondly, the concept of free will, once having
been made fuller by its extension into the sub-Logoi known as
mind/body/spirit complexes, creates and re-creates and continues to create
as a function of its very nature.
Questioner: You stated previously that The Choice is made in this third-
density and is the axis upon which the creation turns. Could you expand on
your reason for making that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a statement of the nature of creation as we speak to
you.
Questioner: I did not understand that. Could you say that in a different
way?
Ra: I am Ra. As you have noted, the creation of which your Logos is a part
is a protean entity which grows and learns upon a macrocosmic scale. The
Logos is not a part of time. All that is learned from experience in an octave
is, therefore, the harvest of that Logos and is further the nature of that
Logos.
                                       28
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

The original Logos’s experience was, viewed in space/time, small; Its
experience now, more. Therefore we say, as we now speak to you at this
space/time, the nature of creation is as we have described. This does not
deny the process by which this nature has been achieved but merely ratifies
the product.
Questioner: After third density, in our experience, social memory
complexes are polarized positively and negatively. Is the interaction of social
memory complexes of opposite polarity equivalent, but on a magnified
scale, to the interaction between mind/body/spirit complexes of opposite
polarity? Is this how experience is gained as a function of polarity difference
in fourth and fifth densities?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: This is a hard question to ask, but what is the value
experientially of the formation of positive and negative social memory
complexes, of the separation of the polarities at that point rather than the
allowing for the mixing of mind/body/spirit complexes of opposite polarity
in the higher densities?
Ra: I am Ra. The purpose of polarity is to develop the potential to do work.
This is the great characteristic of those, shall we say, experiments which
have evolved since the concept of The Choice was appreciated. Work is
done far more efficiently and with greater purity, intensity, and variety by
the voluntary searching of mind/body/spirit complexes for the lessons of
third and fourth densities. The action of fifth density is viewed in
space/time the same with or without polarity. However, viewed in
time/space, the experiences of wisdom are greatly enlarged and deepened
due, again, to the voluntary nature of polarized mind/body/spirit action.
Questioner: Then you are saying that as a result of the polarization in
consciousness which has occurred later in the galactic evolution, the
experiences are much more intense along the two paths. Are these
experiences each independent of the other? Must there be action across the
potentiated difference between the positive and negative polarity, or is it
possible to have this experience simply because of the single polarity? This is
difficult to ask.
Ra: I am Ra. We would agree. We shall attempt to pluck the gist of your
query from the surrounding verbiage.
The fourth and fifth densities are quite independent, the positive polarity
functioning with no need of negative and visa-versa. It is to be noted that in
attempting to sway third-density mind/body/spirit complexes in choosing
polarity there evolves a good bit of interaction between the two polarities.
                                      29
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

In sixth density, the density of unity, the positive and negative paths must
needs take in each other for all now must be seen as love/light and
light/love. This is not difficult for the positive polarity which sends love and
light to all other-selves. It is difficult enough for service-to-self polarized
entities that at some point the negative polarity is abandoned.
Questioner: The choice of polarity being unique as a circumstance, shall I
say, for the archetypical basis for the evolution of consciousness in our
particular experience indicates to me that we have arrived, through a long
process of the Creator knowing Itself, at a position of present or maximum
efficiency for the design of a process of experience. That design for
maximum efficiency is in the roots of consciousness and is the archetypical
mind and is a product of everything that has gone before. There are,
unquestionably, relatively pure archetypical concepts for the seven concepts
for mind, body, and spirit. I feel that the language that we have for these is
somewhat inadequate.
However, we shall continue to attempt to investigate the foundation for this
and I am hoping that I have laid the foundation with some degree of
accuracy in attempting to set a background for the development of the
archetypes of our Logos. Have I left out anything or made any errors, or
could you make any comments on my attempt to lay the foundation for the
construction that our Logos used for the archetypes?
Ra: I am Ra. Your queries are thoughtful.
Questioner: Are they accurate, or have I made mistakes?
Ra: I am Ra. There are no mistakes.
Questioner: Let me put it this way. Have I made missteps in my analysis of
what has led to the construction of the archetypes that we experience?
Ra: I am Ra. We may share with you the observation that judgment is no
part of interaction between mind/body/spirit complexes. We have
attempted to answer each query as fully as your language and the extent of
your previous information allow. We may suggest that if, in perusing this
present material, you have further queries, refining any concept, these
queries may be asked and, again, we shall attempt adequate rejoinders.
Questioner: I understand your limitations in answering that. Thank you.
Could you tell me how, in the first density, wind and fire teach earth and
water?
Ra: I am Ra. You may see the air and fire of that which is chaos as literally
illuminating and forming the formless, for earth and water were, in the

                                      30
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

timeless state, unformed. As the active principles of fire and air blow and
burn incandescently about that which nurtures that which is to come, the
water learns to become sea, lake, and river offering the opportunity for
viable life. The earth learns to be shaped, thus offering the opportunity for
viable life.
Questioner: Are the seven archetypes for mind a function of or related to
the seven densities that are to be experienced in the octave?
Ra: I am Ra. The relationship is tangential in that no congruency may be
seen. However, the progress through the archetypes has some of the
characteristics of the progress through the densities. These relationships may
be viewed without being, shall we say, pasted one upon the other.
Questioner: How about the seven bodily energy centers? Are they related to
archetypes in some way?
Ra: I am Ra. The same may be said of these. It is informative to view the
relationships but stifling to insist upon the limitations of congruency. Recall
at all times, if you would use this term that the archetypes are a portion of
the resources of the mind complex.
Questioner: Is there any relationship between the archetypes and the
planets of our solar system?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a simple query. Properly, the archetypes have some
relationship to the planets. However, this relationship is not one which can
be expressed in your language. This, however, has not halted those among
your people who have become adepts from attempting to name and
describe these relationships. To most purely understand, if we may use this
misnomer, the archetypes it is well to view the concepts which make up
each archetype and reserve the study of planets and other correspondences
for meditation.
Questioner: It just seemed to me that since the planets were an outgrowth
of the Logos and since the archetypical mind was the foundation of the
experience that the planets of this Logos would be somewhat related. We
will certainly follow your suggestion.
I have been trying to get a foothold into an undistorted perception, you
might say, of the archetypical mind. It seems to me that everything that I
have read having to do with archetypes has been, to some degree or another,
distorted by the writers and by the fact that our language is not really
capable of description.
You have spoken of the Magician as a basic archetype and that this seems to
have been carried through from the previous octave. Would this be in
                                      31
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

order—if there is an order—the first archetypical concept for this Logos,
the concept that we call the Magician?
Ra: I am Ra. We would first respond to your confusion as regards the
various writings upon the archetypical mind. You may well consider the
very informative difference between a thing in itself and its relationships or
functions. There is much study of archetype which is actually the study of
functions, relationships, and correspondences. The study of planets, for
instance, is an example of archetype seen as function. However, the
archetypes are, first and most profoundly, things in themselves and the
pondering of them and their purest relationships with each other should be
the most useful foundation for the study of the archetypical mind.
We now address your query as to the archetype which is the Matrix of the
Mind. As to its name, the name of Magician is understandable when you
consider that consciousness is the great foundation, mystery, and revelation
which makes this particular density possible. The self-conscious entity is full
of the magic of that which is to come. It may be considered first, for the
mind is the first of the complexes to be developed by the student of spiritual
evolution.
Questioner: Would the archetype then that has been called the High
Priestess, which represents the intuition, be properly the second of the
archetypes?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You see here the recapitulation of the
beginning knowledge of this Logos; that is, matrix and potentiator. The
unconscious is indeed what may be poetically described as High Priestess,
for it is the Potentiator of the Mind and as potentiator for the mind is that
principle which potentiates all experience.
Questioner: Then for the third archetype would the Empress be correct and
be related to disciplined meditation?
Ra: I am Ra. I perceive a mind complex intention of a query, but was aware
only of sound vibratory statement. Please requestion.
Questioner: I was asking if the third archetype was the Empress and was it
correct to say that this archetype had to do with disciplined meditation?
Ra: I am Ra. The third archetype may broadly be grasped as the Catalyst of
the Mind. Thus it takes in far more than disciplined meditation. However,
it is certainly through this faculty that catalyst is most efficiently used. The
Archetype, Three, is perhaps confusedly called Empress although the
intention of this number is the understanding that it represents the
unconscious or female portion of the mind complex being first, shall we say,

                                      32
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 78

used or ennobled by the male or conscious portion of the mind. Thus the
noble name.
Questioner: The fourth archetype is called the Emperor and seems to have
to do with experience of other-selves and the green-ray energy center with
respect to other-selves. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is perceptive. The broad name for Archetype Four may
be the Experience of the Mind. In the tarot you find the name of Emperor.
Again this implies nobility and in this case we may see the suggestion that it
is only through the catalyst which has been processed by the potentiated
consciousness that experience may ensue. Thusly is the conscious mind
ennobled by the use of the vast resources of the unconscious mind.
This instrument’s dorsal side grows stiff, and the instrument tires. We
welcome one more query.
Questioner: I would like to ask the reason for this session having been
longer than most previous sessions and also if there is anything that we can
do to make the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument was given far more than the, shall we say,
usual amount of transferred energy. There is a limit to the amount of energy
of this type which may, with safety, be used when the instrument is, itself,
without physical reserves. This is inevitable due to the various distortions
such as we mentioned previously in this working having to do with growing
dorsal discomfort.
The alignments are fastidious. We appreciate your conscientiousness. In
order to enhance the comfort of the instrument it might be suggested that
careful manipulation of the dorsal area be accomplished before a working.
It is also suggested that, due to the attempt at psychic attack, this
instrument will require warmth along the right side of the physical complex.
There has been some infringement but it should not be long-lasting. It is,
however, well to swaddle this instrument sufficiently to ward off any
manifestation of this cold in physical form.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, merrily rejoicing in the power and in
the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      33
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79
                           February 24, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: The instrument would like to ask if there is any danger in the
instrument receiving too much transferred energy in her present condition?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: She would like to know the function of the energy transfer
during the session?
Ra: I am Ra. The function of this energy transfer is a most helpful one in
that it serves to strengthen the shuttle through which the in-streaming
contact is received. The contact itself will monitor the condition of the
instrument and cease communication when the distortions of the
instrument begin to fluctuate towards the distortions of weakness or pain.
However, while the contact is on-going the strength of the channel through
which this contact flows may be aided by the energy transfer of which you
spoke.
Questioner: We have been ending our banishing ritual prior to the session
by a gesture that relieves us of the magical personality. I was just wondering
if we should maintain this personality and omit that gesture while we are
walking the Circle of One and then relinquish the magical personality only
after the circle is formed or after the session? Which would be more
appropriate?
Ra: I am Ra. The practice of magical workings demands the most rigorous
honesty. If your estimate of your ability is that you can sustain the magical
personality throughout this working, it is well. As long as you have some
doubt it is inadvisable. In any case it is appropriate for this instrument to
return its magical personality rather than carry this persona into the trance
state, for it does not have the requisite magical skill to function in this
circumstance and would be far more vulnerable than if the waking
personality is offered as channel. This working is indeed magical in nature
in the basic sense. However, it is inappropriate to move more quickly than
one’s feet may walk.


                                       34
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Questioner: I would like to question about the third-density experience of
those entities just prior to the original extension of the first distortion to the
sub-Logoi to create the split of polarity. Can you describe, in general, the
differences between the third-density experience of these mind/body/spirits
and the ones who have evolved upon this planet now?
Ra: I am Ra. This material has been previously covered. Please query for
specific interest.
Questioner: Specifically, in the experience where only the service-to-others
polarity in third density evolved, was the veil that was drawn with respect to
knowledge of previous incarnations, etc., in effect for those entities?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Was the reincarnational process like the one that we experience
here in which the third-density body is entered and exited numerous times
during the cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is it possible to give a time of incarnation with respect to our
years and would you do so if it is?
Ra: I am Ra. The optimal incarnative period is somewhere close to a
measure you call a millennium. This is, as you may say, a constant
regardless of other factors of the third-density experience.
Questioner: Then prior to the first extension of the first distortion the veil
or loss of awareness did not occur. From this I will make the assumption
that this veil or loss of remembering consciously that which occurred before
the incarnation was the primary tool for extending the first distortion. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your correctness is limited. This was the first tool.
Questioner: Then from that statement I assume that the Logos first devised
the tool of separating the unconscious from the conscious during what we
call physical incarnations to achieve its objective? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then from that statement I would also assume that many other
tools were conceived and used after the first tool of the so-called veil. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. There have been refinements.


                                        35
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Questioner: The archetypical mind of the Logos prior to this experiment in
veiling was what I would consider to be less complex than it is now, possibly
containing fewer archetypes. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We must ask your patience. We perceive a sudden flare of the
distortion known as pain in this instrument’s left arm and manual
appendages. Please do not touch this instrument. We shall examine the
mind complex and attempt to reposition the limb so that the working may
continue. Then please repeat the query.
(Ninety second pause)
I am Ra. You may proceed.
Questioner: Thank you. Prior to the experiment to extend the first
distortion how many archetypes were there at that time?
Ra: I am Ra. There were nine.
Questioner: I will guess that those nine were three of mind, three of body,
and three of spirit. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I am going to guess that in the system of the tarot those
archetypes would roughly correspond to, for the mind, the Magician, the
Emperor, and the Chariot. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Could you tell me what they correspond to?
Ra: I am Ra. The body, the mind, and the spirit each contained and
functioned under the aegis of the matrix, the potentiator, and the
significator. The significator of the mind, body, and spirit is not identical to
the significator of the mind, body, and spirit complexes.
Questioner: I now understand what you meant in the previous session by
saying that to extend free will the significator must become a complex. It
seems that the significator has become the complex that is the third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh of the mind, the tenth on of the body, and the
seventeenth on of the spirit. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Could you tell me what you mean by “the significator must
become a complex”?
Ra: I am Ra. To be complex is to consist of more than one characteristic
element or concept.
                                       36
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Questioner: I would like to try to understand the archetypes of the mind of
this Logos prior to the extension of the first distortion. In order to better
understand that which we experience now I believe that this is a logical
approach.
We have, as you have stated, the matrix, the potentiator, and the
significator. I understand the matrix as being that which is what we call the
conscious mind, but since it is also that from which the mind is made, I am
at a loss to fully understand these three terms especially with respect to the
time before there was a division in consciousness. Could you expand even
more upon the Matrix of the Mind, the Potentiator of the Mind, and the
Significator of the Mind, how they differ, and what their relationships are,
please?
Ra: I am Ra. The Matrix of Mind is that from which all comes. It is
unmoving yet is the activator in potentiation of all mind activity. The
Potentiator of the Mind is that great resource which may be seen as the sea
into which the consciousness dips ever deeper and more thoroughly in order
to create, ideate, and become more self-conscious.
The Significator of each mind, body, and spirit may be seen as a simple and
unified concept. The Matrix of the Body may be seen to be a reflection in
opposites of the mind; that is, unrestricted motion. The Potentiator of the
Body then is that which, being informed, regulates activity.
The Matrix of the Spirit is difficult to characterize since the nature of spirit
is less motile. The energies and movements of the spirit are, by far, the most
profound yet, having more close association with time/space, do not have
the characteristics of dynamic motion. Thusly one may see the Matrix as the
deepest darkness and the Potentiator of Spirit as the most sudden
awakening, illuminating, and generative influence.
This is the description of Archetypes One through Nine before the onset of
influence of the co-Creator or sub-Logos’ realization of free will.
Questioner: The first change made then for this extension of free will was
to make the communication between the Matrix and the Potentiator of the
Mind relatively unavailable one to the other during the incarnation. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We would perhaps rather term the condition as relatively more
mystery-filled than relatively unavailable.
Questioner: The idea was then to create some type of veil between the
Matrix and the Potentiator of the Mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
                                      37
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Questioner: This veil then occurs between what we now call the
unconscious and conscious minds. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: It was probably the design of the Logos to allow the conscious
mind greater freedom under the first distortion by partitioning, you might
say, this from the Potentiator or unconscious which had a greater
communication with the total mind, therefore, allowing for the birth of
uneducated, to use a poor term, portions of consciousness. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is roughly correct.
Questioner: Could you de-roughen it or elucidate a bit on that?
Ra: I am Ra. There is intervening material before we may do so.
Questioner: OK. Was then this simple experiment carried out and the
product of this experiment observed before greater complexity was
attempted?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have said there have been a great number of successive
experiments.
Questioner: I was just wondering since this seems to be the crux of the
experiment, the large breaking point between no extension of the first
distortion and the extension of the first distortion, what the result of this
original experiment was with respect to that which was created from it.
What was the result of that?
Ra: I am Ra. This is previously covered material. The result of these
experiments has been a more vivid, varied, and intense experience of
Creator by Creator.
Questioner: Well I was aware of that. I probably didn’t state the question
correctly. It’s a very difficult question to state. I don’t know if it’s worth
attempting to continue with but what I meant was when this very first
experiment with the veiling process occurred, did it result in service-to-self
polarization with the first experiment?
Ra: I am Ra. The early, if we may use this term, Logoi produced service-to-
self and service-to-others mind/body/spirit complexes immediately. The
harvestability of these entities was not so immediate and thus refinements of
the archetypes began apace .
Questioner: Now we are getting to what I was trying to determine. Then at
this point were there still only nine archetypes and the veil had just been
drawn between the Matrix and the Potentiator of the Mind?

                                        38
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Ra: I am Ra. There were nine archetypes and many shadows.
Questioner: By shadows do you mean the, what I might refer to as, birthing
of small archetypical biases?
Ra: I am Ra. Rather we would describe these shadows as the inchoate
thoughts of helpful structures not yet fully conceived.
Questioner: Would The Choice exist at this point during the creation of
the first service-to-self polarity?
Ra: I am Ra. Implicit in the veiling or separation of two archetypes is the
concept of choice. The refinements to this concept took many experiences.
Questioner: I’m sorry that I have so much difficulty in asking these
questions, but this is material that I find somewhat difficult.
I find it interesting that the very first experiment of veiling the Matrix of the
Mind from the Potentiator of the Mind and visa-versa created service-to-self
polarity. This seems to be a very important philosophical point in the
development of the creation and possibly the beginning of a system of what
we would call magic not envisioned previously.
Let me ask this question. Prior to the extension of the first distortion was
the magical potential of the higher densities as great as it is now when the
greatest potential was achieved in consciousness for each density? This is
difficult to ask. What I am asking is that at the end of fourth density, prior
to the extension of free will, was what we call magical potential as great as it
is now at the end of fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. As you understand, if we may use this misnomer, magic, the
magical potential in third and fourth density was then far greater than after
the change. However, there was far, far less desire or will to use this
potential.
Questioner: Now, to be sure that I understand you: prior to the change and
the extension of free will, let’s take specifically the end of fourth density,
magical potential for the condition when there was only service-to-others
polarization was much greater at the end of fourth density than at the end
of fourth density immediately after the split of polarization and the
extension of free will. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Magical ability is the ability to consciously use the so-called
unconscious. Therefore, there was maximal ability prior to the innovation
of sub-Logoi’s free will.
Questioner: OK. At the present time we are experiencing the effects of a
more complex or greater number of archetypes and I have guessed that the
                                       39
                  The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

ones we are experiencing now in the mind are as follows: We have the
Magician and High Priestess which correspond to the Matrix and
Potentiator with the veil drawn between them which is the primary creator
of the extension of the first distortion. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We are unable to answer this query without intervening
material.
Questioner: OK. Sorry about that.
The next archetype, the Empress, is the Catalyst of the Mind, that which
acts upon the conscious mind to change it. The fourth archetype is the
Emperor, the Experience of the Mind, which is that material stored in the
unconscious which creates its continuing bias. Am I correct with those
statements?
Ra: I am Ra. Though far too rigid in your statements, you perceive correct
relationships. There is a great deal of dynamic interrelationship in these first
four archetypes
Questioner: Would the Hierophant then be somewhat of a governor or
sorter of these effects so as to create the proper assimilation by the
unconscious of that which comes through the conscious?
Ra: I am Ra. Although thoughtful, the supposition is incorrect in its heart.
Questioner: What would be the Hierophant?
Ra: I am Ra. The Hierophant is the Significator of the Body [Mind 2]
complex, its very nature. We may note that the characteristics of which you
speak do have bearing upon the Significator of the Mind complex but are
not the heart. The heart of the mind complex is that dynamic entity which
absorbs, seeks, and attempts to learn.
Questioner: Then is the Hierophant that link, you might say, between the
mind and the body?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a strong relationship between the significators of the
mind, the body, and the spirit. Your statement is too broad.
Questioner: Let me skip over the Hierophant for a minute because I am
really not understanding that at all and just ask if the Lovers represent a
merging of the conscious and the unconscious or the communication of the
conscious and unconscious?

2
    Ra corrected this error in Session #80. The Hierophant is the Significator of the
    Mind.

                                          40
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Ra: I am Ra. Again, without being at all unperceptive, you miss the heart of
this particular archetype which may be more properly called the
Transformation of the Mind.
Questioner: Transformation of the mind into what?
Ra: I am Ra. As you observe Archetype Six you may see the student of the
mysteries being transformed by the need to choose betwixt the light and the
dark in mind.
Questioner: Would the Conqueror or Chariot then represent the
culmination of the action of the first six archetypes into a conquering of the
mental processes, even possibly removing the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. This is most perceptive. The Archetype Seven is one difficult
to enunciate. We may call it the Path, the Way, or the Great Way of the
Mind. Its foundation is a reflection and substantial summary of Archetypes
One through Six.
One may also see the Way of the Mind as showing the kingdom or fruits of
appropriate travel through the mind in that the mind continues to move as
majestically through the material it conceives of as a chariot drawn by royal
lions or steeds.
At this time we would suggest one more full query for this instrument is
experiencing some distortions towards pain.
Questioner: Then I will just ask about the one of the archetypes which I am
the least able to understand at this point if I can use that word at all. I am
still very much in the dark, so to speak, in respect to the Hierophant and
precisely what it is. Could you give me some other indication of what that
is?
Ra: I am Ra. You have been most interested in the Significator which must
needs become complex. The Hierophant is the original archetype of mind
which has been made complex through the subtile movements of the
conscious and unconscious. The complexities of mind were evolved rather
than the simple melding of experience from Potentiator to Matrix.
The mind itself became an actor possessed of free will and, more especially,
will. As the Significator of the mind, the Hierophant has the will to know,
but what shall it do with its knowledge, and for what reasons does it seek?
The potentials of a complex significator are manifold.
Are there any brief queries at this working?
Questioner: Only is there anything that we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable or to improve the contact?
                                      41
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 79

Ra: I am Ra. All is well. For some small portion of your future the
instrument would be well advised to wear upon the hands those aids to
comfort which it has neglected to use. There has been some trauma to both
hands and arms and, therefore, we have had to somewhat abbreviate this
working.
I am Ra. You are conscientious, my friends. We leave you in the love and in
the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the
power and the peace of the One Glorious infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     42
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80
                          February 27, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. We greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator.
Before we initiate this working we would wish to correct an error which we
have found in previous material. That Archetype Five which you have called
the Hierophant is the Significator of the Mind complex.
This instrument is prey to sudden flares towards the distortion known as
pain. We are aware of your conscientious attempts to aid the instrument
but know of no other modality available to the support group other than
the provision of water therapy upon the erect spinal portion of the physical
body complex, which we have previously mentioned.
This instrument’s distortions of body do not ever rule out, shall we say,
such flares during these periods of increased distortion of the body complex.
Our contact may become momentarily garbled. Therefore, we request that
any information which seems garbled be questioned as we wish this contact
to remain as undistorted as the limitations of language, mentality, and
sensibility allow.
We communicate now.
Questioner: Thank you. Could you please give me the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is experiencing mild fluctuations of the
physical energy complex which are causing sudden changes from physical
energy deficit to some slight physical energy. This is due to many, what you
may call, prayers and affirmations offered to and by the instrument offset by
continual greetings whenever it is feasible by the fifth-density entity of
whom you are aware.
In other respects, the instrument is in the previously stated condition.
Questioner: I had to leave the room for a forgotten item after we performed
the banishing ritual. Did this have a deleterious effect on the ritual or the
working?
Ra: I am Ra. Were it the only working the lapse would have been critical.
There is enough residual energy of a protective nature in this place of
working that this lapse, though quite unrecommended, does not represent a
threat to the protection which the ritual of which you spoke offers.

                                      43
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

Questioner: Has our fifth-density visitor been less able to affect the
instrument during our more recent workings?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall answer in two parts. Firstly, during the workings
themselves the entity has been bated to a great extent. Secondly, in the
general experiential circumstances of your space/time experience this fifth-
density entity is able to greet this entity with the same effectiveness upon
the physical body complex as always since the inception of its contact with
your group. This is due to the several physical complex distortions of the
instrument.
However, the instrument has become more mentally and spiritually able to
greet this entity with love thereby reducing the element of fear which is an
element the entity counts as a great weapon in the attempt to cause
cessation, in any degree, of the Ra contact.
Questioner: What is the reason for the fact that the entity is able to act
through physical distortions that are already present as opposed to being
unable to act upon an entity who has no physical distortion at all?
Ra: I am Ra. The key to this query is the term, distortion. Any distortion,
be it physical, mental, or spiritual in complex nature, may be accentuated
by the suggestion of one able to work magically; that is, to cause changes in
consciousness. This entity has many physical distortions. Each in the group
has various mental distortions. Their nature varies. The less balanced the
distortion by self-knowledge, the more adeptly the entity may accentuate
such a distortion in order to mitigate against the smooth functioning and
harmony of the group.
Questioner: As Ra well knows, the information that we accumulate here
will be illuminating to a very minor percentage of those who populate this
planet simply because there are very few people who can understand it.
However, it seems that our fifth-density visitor is, shall we say, dead set
against this communication. Can you tell me why this is so important to
him since it is of such a limited effect, I would guess, upon the harvest of
this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. Purity does not end with the harvest of third density. The
fidelity of Ra towards the attempt to remove distortions is total. This
constitutes an acceptance of responsibility for service-to-others which is of
relative purity. The instrument through which we speak and its support
group have a similar fidelity and, disregarding any inconvenience to self,
desire to serve others. Due to the nature of the group the queries made to us
by the group have led rapidly into somewhat abstruse regions of
commentary. This content does not mitigate against the underlying purity

                                      44
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

of the contact. Such purity is as a light. Such an intensity of light attracts
attention.
Questioner: What would our fifth-density visitor hope to gain for himself if
he were to be successful in eliminating this contact?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have previously stated, the entity hopes to gain a
portion of that light; that is, the mind/body/spirit complex of the
instrument. Barring this, the entity intends to put out the light.
Questioner: I understand this up to a point and that point is if the entity
were successful in either of these attempts of what value would this be to
him? Would it increase his ability? Would it increase his polarity? By what
mechanism would it do whatever it does?
Ra: I am Ra. Having attempted, for some of your space/time with no long-
lasting result, to do these things the entity may be asking this question of
itself. The gain for triumph is an increase in negative polarity to the entity
in that it has removed a source of radiance and, thereby, offered to this
space/time the opportunity of darkness where there once was light. In the
event that it succeeded in enslaving the mind/body/spirit complex of the
instrument it would have enslaved a fairly powerful entity, thus adding to
its power.
Questioner: I am sorry for my lack of penetration of these mechanisms and
I apologize for some rather stupid questions, but I think we have here a
point that is somewhat central to what we are presently attempting to
understand. Some of my next questions may be almost unacceptably stupid,
but I will attempt to try to understand what this power that our visitor seeks
is and how he uses it. It seems to me that this is central to the mind and its
evolution.
As our visitor increases his power through these works, what is the power
that he increases? Can you describe it?
Ra: I am Ra. The power of which you speak is a spiritual power. The
powers of the mind, as such, do not encompass such works as these. You
may, with some fruitfulness, consider the possibilities of moonlight. You are
aware that we have described the Matrix of the Spirit as a Night. The
moonlight, then, offers either a true picture seen in shadow or chimera and
falsity. The power of falsity is deep as is the power to discern truth from
shadow. The shadow of hidden things is an infinite depth in which is stored
the power of the one infinite Creator.
The adept, then, is working with the power of hidden things illuminated by
that which can be false or true. To embrace falsity, to know it, and to seek

                                       45
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

it, and to use it gives a power that is most great. This is the nature of the
power of your visitor and may shed some light upon the power of one who
seeks in order to serve others as well, for the missteps in the night are oh! so
easy.
Questioner: Are you saying, then, that this power is of the spirit and not of
the mind or of the body?
Ra: I am Ra. The work of the adept is based upon previous work with the
mind and the body, else work with the spirit would not be possible on a
dependable basis. With this comment we may assert the correctness of your
assumption.
Questioner: The fifteenth archetype is the Matrix of the Spirit and has been
called the Devil. Can you tell me why that is so?
Ra: I am Ra. We do not wish to be facile in such a central query, but we
may note that the nature of the spirit is so infinitely subtle that the
fructifying influence of light upon the great darkness of the spirit is very
often not as apparent as the darkness itself. The progress chosen by many
adepts becomes a confused path as each adept attempts to use the Catalyst
of the Spirit. Few there are which are successful in grasping the light of the
sun. By far, the majority of adepts remain groping in the moonlight and, as
we have said, this light can deceive as well as uncover hidden mystery.
Therefore, the melody, shall we say, of this matrix often seems to be of a
negative and evil, as you would call it, nature.
It is also to be noted that an adept is one which has freed itself more and
more from the constraints of the thoughts, opinions, and bonds of other-
selves. Whether this is done for service to others or service to self, it is a
necessary part of the awakening of the adept. This freedom is seen by those
not free as what you would call evil or black. The magic is recognized; the
nature is often not.
Questioner: Could I say, then, that implicit in the process of becoming
adept is the seeming polarization towards service to self because the adept
becomes disassociated with many of his kind?
Ra: I am Ra. This is likely to occur. The apparent happening is
disassociation whether the truth is service to self and thus true disassociation
from other-selves or service-to-others and thus true association with the
heart of all other-selves and disassociation only from the illusory husks
which prevent the adept from correctly perceiving the self and other-self as
one.



                                       46
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

Questioner: Then you say that this effect of disassociation on the service-to-
others adept is a stumbling block or slowing process in reaching that goal to
which he aspires? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. This disassociation from the miasma of
illusion and misrepresentation of each and every distortion is a quite
necessary portion of an adept’s path. It may be seen by others to be
unfortunate.
Questioner: Then is this, from the point of view of the fifteenth archetype,
somewhat of an excursion into the Matrix of the Spirit in this process? Does
that make any sense?
Ra: I am Ra. The excursion of which you speak and the process of
disassociation is most usually linked with that archetype you call Hope
which we would prefer to call Faith. This archetype is the Catalyst of the
Spirit and, because of the illuminations of the Potentiator of the Spirit, will
begin to cause these changes in the adept’s viewpoint.
Questioner: I didn’t intend to get too far ahead of my questioning process
here. The positively or negatively polarized adept, then, is building a
potential to draw directly on the spirit for power. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It would be more proper to say that the adept is calling
directly through the spirit to the universe for its power, for the spirit is a
shuttle.
Questioner: The only obvious significant difference, I believe, between the
positive and negative adepts in using this shuttle is the way they polarize. Is
there a relationship between the archetypes of the spirit and whether the
polarization is either positive or negative? Is, for instance, the positive
calling through the sixteenth archetype and the negative calling through the
fifteenth archetype? I am very confused about this and I imagine that that
question is either poor or meaningless. Can you answer that?
Ra: I am Ra. It is a challenge to answer such a query, for there is some
confusion in its construction. However, we shall attempt to speak upon the
subject.
The adept, whether positive or negative, has the same Matrix. The
Potentiator is also identical. Due to the Catalyst of each adept the adept
may begin to pick and choose that into which it shall look further. The
Experience of the Spirit, that which you have called the Moon, is then, by
far, the more manifest of influences upon the polarity of the adept. Even the
most unhappy of experiences, shall we say, which seem to occur in the
Catalyst of the adept, seen from the viewpoint of the spirit, may, with the

                                       47
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

discrimination possible in shadow, be worked with until light equaling the
light of brightest noon descends upon the adept and positive or service-to-
others illumination has occurred. The service-to-self adept will satisfy itself
with the shadows and, grasping the light of day, will toss back the head in
grim laughter, preferring the darkness.
Questioner: I guess the nineteenth archetype of the spirit would be the
Significator of the Spirit. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: How would you describe the Significator of the Spirit?
Ra: I am Ra. In answer to the previous query we set about doing just this.
The Significator of the Spirit is that living entity which either radiates or
absorbs the love and the light of the one infinite Creator, radiates it to
others or absorbs it for the self.
Questioner: Then would this process of radiation or absorption, since we
have what I would call a flux or flux rate, be the measure of the adept?
Ra: I am Ra. This may be seen to be a reasonably adequate statement.
Questioner: Then for the twentieth archetype I’m guessing that this is the
Transformation of the Spirit, possibly analogous to the sixth-density
merging of the paths. Is this in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Sorry about that. Can you tell me what the twentieth archetype
would be?
Ra: I am Ra. That which you call the Sarcophagus in your system may be
seen to be the material world, if you will. This material world is transformed
by the spirit into that which is infinite and eternal. The infinity of the spirit
is an even greater realization than the infinity of consciousness, for
consciousness which has been disciplined by will and faith is that
consciousness which may contact intelligent infinity directly. There are
many things which fall away in the many, many steps of adepthood. We, of
Ra, still walk these steps and praise the one infinite Creator at each
transformation.
Questioner: Then I would guess that the twenty-first archetype would
represent contact with intelligent infinity. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, although one may also see the reflection of this
contact as well as the contact with intelligent energy which is the Universe
or, as you have called it somewhat provincially, the World.

                                       48
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 80

Questioner: Then by this contact also with intelligent energy can you give
me an example of what this would be for both the contact with intelligent
infinity and the contact with intelligent energy? Could you give me an
example of what type of experience this would result in, if that is at all
possible?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last query of this working of full length. We
have discussed the possibilities of contact with intelligent energy, for this
energy is the energy of the Logos, and thus it is the energy which heals,
builds, removes, destroys, and transforms all other-selves as well as the self.
The contact with intelligent infinity is most likely to produce an
unspeakable joy in the entity experiencing such contact. If you wish to
query in more detail upon this subject, we invite you to do so in another
working. Is there a brief query before we close this working?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to improve the contact or to
make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. The alignments are most conscientious. We are appreciative.
The entity which serves as instrument is somewhat distorted towards that
condition you call stiffness of the dorsal regions. Manipulation would be
helpful.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, glorying in the light and the love of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the
peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                       49
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81
                            March 22, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first tell me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex energy is in deficit at this particular
space/time nexus due to prolonged psychic accentuation of pre-existing
distortions. The remainder of the energy complex levels are as previously
stated.
Questioner: Is this the reason for the instrument’s feeling of uninterrupted
weariness?
Ra: I am Ra. There are portions of your space/time in which this may be
said to be symptomatic of the psychic greeting reaction. However, the
continual weariness is not due to psychic greeting but is rather an inevitable
consequence of this contact.
Questioner: Why is this an inevitable consequence? What is the mechanism
of this contact that creates this weariness?
Ra: I am Ra. The mechanism creating weariness is that connection betwixt
the density wherein this instrument’s mind/body/spirit complex is safely
kept during these workings and the altogether variant density in which the
instrument’s physical body complex resides at this space/time. As the
instrument takes on more of the coloration of the resting density the third-
density experience seems more heavy and wearisome. This was accepted by
the instrument, as it desired to be of service. Therefore, we accept also this
effect about which nothing of which we are aware may be done.
Questioner: Is the effect a function of the number of sessions, and has it
reached a peak level or will it continue to increase in effect?
Ra: I am Ra. This wearying effect will continue but should not be confused
with the physical energy levels, having only to do with the, as you would
call it, daily round of experience. In this sphere those things which are
known already to aid this instrument will continue to be of aid. You will,
however, notice the gradual increase in transparency, shall we say, of the
vibrations of the instrument.
Questioner: I didn’t understand what you meant by that last statement.
Could you explain it?

                                      50
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

Ra: I am Ra. Weariness of the time/space nature may be seen to be that
reaction of transparent or pure vibrations with impure, confused, or opaque
environs.
Questioner: Is there any of this effect upon the other two of us in this
group?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: Then we would also experience the uninterrupted weariness as
a consequence of the contact. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument, by the very nature of the contact, bears the
brunt of this effect. Each of the support group, by offering the love and the
light of the one infinite Creator in unqualified support in these workings
and in energy transfers for the purpose of these workings, experiences
between 10 and 15 percent, roughly, of this effect. It is cumulative and
identical in the continual nature of its manifestation.
Questioner: What could be the result of this continued wearying effect after
a long period?
Ra: I am Ra. You ask a general query with infinite answers. We shall over-
generalize in order to attempt to reply.
One group might be tempted and thus lose the very contact which caused
the difficulty. So the story would end.
Another group might be strong at first but not faithful in the face of
difficulty. Thus the story would end.
Another group might choose the path of martyrdom in its completeness and
use the instrument until its physical body complex failed from the harsh toll
demanded when all energy was gone.
This particular group, at this particular nexus, is attempting to conserve the
vital energy of the instrument. It is attempting to balance love of service and
wisdom of service, and it is faithful to the service in the face of difficulty.
Temptation has not yet ended this group’s story.
We may not know the future, but the probability of this situation
continuing over a relatively substantial period of your space/time is large.
The significant factor is the will of the instrument and of the group to serve.
That is the only cause for balancing the slowly increasing weariness which
will continue to distort your perceptions. Without this will the contact
might be possible but finally seem too much of an effort.



                                      51
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

Questioner: The instrument would like to know why she has a feeling of
increased vital energy?
Ra: I am Ra. We leave this answer to the instrument.
Questioner: She would like to know if she has an increased sensitivity to
foods?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument has an increased sensitivity to all stimuli. It is
well that it use prudence.
Questioner: Going back to the previous session, picking up on the tenth
archetype, which is the Catalyst of the Body, the Wheel of Fortune
represents interaction with other-selves. Is this a correct statement?
Ra: I am Ra. This may be seen to be a roughly correct statement in that
each catalyst is dealing with the nature of those experiences entering the
energy web and vibratory perceptions of the mind/body/spirit complex. The
most carefully noted addition would be that the outside stimulus of the
Wheel of Fortune is that which offers both positive and negative experience.
Questioner: The eleventh archetype would then be the Experience of the
Body which represents the catalyst which has been processed by the
mind/body/spirit complex and is called the Enchantress because it produces
further seed for growth. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: We have already discussed the Significator, so I will skip
number thirteen. The Transformation of the Body is called Death, for with
death the body is transformed to a higher vibrational body for additional
learning. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and may be seen to be additionally correct in
that each moment and certainly each diurnal period of the bodily
incarnation offers death and rebirth to one which is attempting to use the
catalyst which is offered it.
Questioner: Finally, the fourteenth, the Way of the Body is called the
Alchemist because there is an infinity of time for the various bodies to
operate within to learn the lessons necessary for evolution. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is less than completely correct as the Great Way of the
Body must be seen, as are all the archetypes of the body, to be a mirror
image of the thrust of the activity of the mind. The body is the creature of
the mind and is the instrument of manifestation for the fruits of mind and


                                       52
                  The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

spirit. Therefore, you may see the body as providing the athanor 3 through
which the Alchemist manifests gold.
Questioner: I have guessed that the way to enter into a better
comprehension of the archetypes is to compare what we experience now,
after the veil, with what was experienced prior to that time, starting possibly
as far back as the beginning of this octave of experience, to see how we got
into the condition that we are in now. If this is agreeable I would like to
retreat to the very beginning of this octave of experience to investigate the
conditions of mind, body, and spirit as they evolved in this octave. Is this
acceptable?
Ra: I am Ra. The direction of questions is your provenance.
Questioner: Ra states that it has knowledge of only this octave, but it seems
that Ra has complete knowledge of this octave.
Can you tell me why this is?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, we do not have complete knowledge of this octave.
There are portions of the seventh density which, although described to us
by our teachers, remain mysterious. Secondly, we have experienced a great
deal of the available refining catalyst of this octave, and our teachers have
worked with us most carefully that we may be one with all, that in turn our
eventual returning to the great all-ness of creation shall be complete.
Questioner: Then Ra has knowledge from the first beginnings of this octave
through its present experience and what I might call direct or experiential
knowledge through communication with those space/times and time/spaces,
but has not yet evolved to or penetrated the seventh level. Is this a roughly
correct statement?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Why does Ra not have any knowledge of that which was prior
to the beginning of this octave?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us compare octaves to islands. It may be that the
inhabitants of an island are not alone upon a planetary sphere, but if an
ocean-going vehicle in which one may survive has not been invented, true
knowledge of other islands is possible only if an entity comes among the
islanders and says, “I am from elsewhere.” This is a rough analogy.
However, we have evidence of this sort, both of previous creation and


3
    athanor: an oven; a fire; a digesting furnace, formerly used in alchemy, so
    constructed as to maintain a uniform and constant heat.

                                          53
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

creation to be, as we in the stream of space/time and time/space view these
apparently non-simultaneous events.
Questioner: We presently find ourselves in the Milky Way Galaxy of some
200 or so billion stars and there are millions and millions of these large
galaxies spread out through what we call space. To Ra’s knowledge, can I
assume that the number of these galaxies is infinite? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct and is a significant point.
Questioner: The point being that we have unity. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive.
Questioner: Then what portion of these galaxies is Ra aware of? Has Ra
experienced consciousness in many other of these galaxies?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Has Ra experienced or does Ra have any knowledge of any of
these other galaxies? Has Ra traveled to, in one form or another, any of
these other galaxies?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: It’s unimportant, but how many other of these galaxies has Ra
traveled to?
Ra: I am Ra. We have opened our hearts in radiation of love to the entire
creation. Approximately 90 percent of the creation is at some level aware of
the sending and able to reply. All of the infinite Logoi are one in the
consciousness of love. This is the type of contact which we enjoy rather
than travel.
Questioner: So that I can just get a little idea of what I am talking about,
what are the limits of Ra’s travel in the sense of directly experiencing or
seeing the activities of various places? Is it solely within this galaxy, and if
so, how much of this galaxy? Or does it include some other galaxies?
Ra: I am Ra. Although it would be possible for us to move at will
throughout the creation within this Logos, that is to say, the Milky Way
Galaxy, so-called, we have moved where we were called to service; these
locations being, shall we say, local and including Alpha Centauri, planets of
your solar system which you call the Sun, Cepheus, and Zeta Reticuli. To
these sub-Logoi we have come, having been called.
Questioner: Was the call in each instance from the third-density beings or
was this call from other densities?

                                        54
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

Ra: I am Ra. In general, the latter supposition is correct. In the particular
case of the Sun sub-Logos, third density is the density of calling.
Questioner: Ra then has not moved at any time into one of the other major
galaxies. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Does Ra have knowledge of any other major galaxy or the
consciousness of anything in that galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. We assume you are speaking of the possibility of knowledge of
other major galaxies. There are Wanderers from other major galaxies drawn
to the specific needs of a single call. There are those among our social
memory complex which have become Wanderers in other major galaxies.
Thus there has been knowledge of other major galaxies, for to one whose
personality or mind/body/spirit complex has been crystallized the universe
is one place and there is no bar upon travel. However, our interpretation of
your query was a query concerning the social memory complex traveling to
another major galaxy. We have not done this, nor do we contemplate it, for
we can reach in love with our hearts.
Questioner: Thank you. In this line of questioning I am trying to establish
a basis for understanding the foundation for not only the experience that we
have now but how the experience was formed and how it is related to all the
rest of the experience through the portion of the octave as we understand it.
I am assuming, then, that all of these galaxies, this infinite number of
galaxies that we can just begin to become aware of with our telescopes, are
all of the same octave. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I was wondering if some of the Wanderers from Ra in going to
some of the other major galaxies, that is, leaving this system of some 200
billion stars of lenticular shape and going to another cluster of billions of
stars and finding their way into some planetary situation there, would
encounter the dual polarity that we have here, the service-to-self and the
service-to-others polarities?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: You stated earlier that toward the center of this galaxy is what,
to use a poor term, you could call the older portion where you would find
no service-to-self polarization. Am I correct in assuming that this is true
with the other galaxies with which Wanderers from Ra have experience? At
the center of these galaxies only the service-to-others polarity exists and the
experiment started farther out toward the rim of the galaxy?
                                       55
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

Ra: I am Ra. Various Logoi and sub-Logoi had various methods of arriving
at the discovery of the efficiency of free will in intensifying the experience of
the Creator by the Creator. However, in each case this has been a pattern.
Questioner: You mean then that the pattern is that the service-to-self
polarization appeared farther out from the center of the galactic spiral?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: From this I will assume that from the beginning of the octave
we had the core of many galactic spirals forming, and I know that this is
incorrect in the sense of timelessness, but as the spiral formed then I am
assuming that in this particular octave the experiment of the veiling and the
extending of free will must have started, roughly, simultaneously in many,
many of the budding or building galactic systems. Am I in any way correct
with this assumption?
Ra: I am Ra. You are precisely correct. This instrument is unusually fragile
at this space/time and has used much of the transferred energy. We would
invite one more full query for this working.
Questioner: Actually, I don’t have much more on this except to make the
assumption that there must have been some type of communication
throughout the octave so that, when the first experiment became effective,
knowledge of this spread rapidly through the octave and was picked up by
other budding galactic spirals, you might say. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. To be aware of the nature of this
communication is to be aware of the nature of the Logos. Much of what
you call creation has never separated from the One Logos of this octave and
resides within the one infinite Creator. Communication in such an
environment is the communication of cells of the body. That which is
learned by one is known to all. The sub-Logoi, then, have been in the
position of refining the discoveries of what might be called the earlier sub-
Logoi. May we ask if we may answer any brief queries at this working?
Questioner: Only if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. It is difficult to determine the energy levels of the instrument
and support group. Of this we are aware. It is, however, recommended that
every attempt be made to enter each working with the most desirable
configurations of energy possible. All is well, my friends. You are
conscientious and the alignments are well.



                                       56
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 81

I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                     57
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82
                             March 27, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Is there anything at all that we could do that we are not
doing—besides eliminating the contact—to increase the physical energy of
the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. There is the possibility/probability that the whirling of the
water with spine erect would alter, somewhat, the distortion towards what
you call pain which this entity experiences in the dorsal region on a
continuous level. This in turn could aid in the distortion towards increase
of physical energy to some extent.
Questioner: I would like to consider the condition at a time or position just
prior to the beginning of this octave of experience. I am assuming that, just
prior to the beginning of this octave, intelligent infinity had created and
already experienced one or more previous octaves. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You assume correctly. However, the phrase would more
informatively read, infinite intelligence had experienced previous octaves.
Questioner: Does Ra have any knowledge of the number of previous
octaves; if so, how many?
Ra: I am Ra. As far as we are aware we are in an infinite creation. There is
no counting.
Questioner: That’s what I thought you might say. Am I correct in assuming
that at the beginning of this octave, out of what I would call a void of space,
seeds of an infinite number of galactic systems such as the Milky Way
Galaxy appeared and grew in spiral fashion simultaneously?
Ra: I am Ra. There are duple areas of potential confusion. Firstly, let us say
that the basic concept is reasonably well-stated. Now we address the
confusions. The nature of true simultaneity is such that, indeed, all is
simultaneous. However, in your modes of perception you would perhaps
more properly view the seeding of the creation as that of growth from the
center or core outward. The second confusion lies in the term, ‘void’. We
would substitute the noun, ‘plenum’.

                                       58
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

Questioner: Then, if I were observing the beginning of the octave at that
time through a telescope, say from this position, would I see the center of
many, many galaxies appearing and each of them then spreading outward in
a spiraling fashion over what we would consider billions of years, but the
spirals spreading outward in approximately what we would consider the
same rate so that all these galaxies began as the first speck of light at the
same time and then spread out at roughly the same rate? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The query has confusing elements. There is a center to
infinity. From this center all spreads. Therefore, there are centers to the
creation, to the galaxies, to star systems, to planetary systems, and to
consciousness. In each case you may see growth from the center outward.
Thus you may see your query as being over-general in concept.
Questioner: Considering only our Milky Way Galaxy at its beginnings, I
will assume that the first occurrence that we could find with our physical
apparatus was the appearance of a star of the nature of our sun. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In the case of the galactic systems the first manifestation of the
Logos is a cluster of central systems which generate the outward swirling
energies producing, in their turn, further energy centers for the Logos or
what you would call stars.
Questioner: Are these central original creations or clusters what we call
stars?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, the closer to the, shall we say,
beginning of the manifestation of the Logos the star is, the more it partakes
in the one original thought.
Questioner: Why does this partaking in the original thought have a
gradient radially outward? That’s the way I understand your statement.
Ra: I am Ra. This is the plan of the one infinite Creator. The One Original
Thought is the harvest of all previous, if you would use this term,
experience of the Creator by the Creator. As It decides to know Itself It
generates Itself, into that plenum full of the glory and the power of the one
infinite Creator which is manifested to your perceptions as space or outer
space. Each generation of this knowing begets a knowing which has the
capacity, through free will, to choose methods of knowing Itself. Therefore,
gradually, step by step, the Creator becomes that which may know Itself,
and the portions of the Creator partake less purely in the power of the
original word or thought. The Creator does not properly create as much as
It experiences Itself.

                                      59
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

Questioner: What was the form, condition, or experience of the first
division of consciousness that occurred at the beginning of this octave at the
beginning of this galactic experience?
Ra: I am Ra. We touch upon previous material. The harvest of the previous
octave, was the Creator of Love manifested in mind, body, and spirit. This
form of the Creator experiencing Itself may perhaps be said to be the first
division.
Questioner: I was interested specifically in how this very first division
showed up in this octave. I was interested to know if it made the transition
through first, second, third, fourth, etc. densities? I would like to take the
first mind/body/spirit complexes and trace their experience from the very
start to the present so that I could better understand the condition that we
are in now by comparing it with this original growth. Could you please tell
me precisely how this came about as to the formation of the planets and
growth through the densities, if that is the way it happened, please?
Ra: I am Ra. Your queries seem more confused than your basic mental
distortions in this area. Let us speak in general and perhaps you may find a
less confused and more simple method of eliciting information in this area.
A very great deal of creation was manifested without the use of the concepts
involved in consciousness, as you know it. The creation itself is a form of
consciousness which is unified, the Logos being the one great heart of
creation. The process of evolution through this period, which may be seen
to be timeless, is most valuable to take into consideration, for it is against
the background of this essential unity of the fabric of creation that we find
the ultimate development of the Logoi which chose to use that portion of
the harvested consciousness of the Creator to move forward with the process
of knowledge of self. As it had been found to be efficient to use the various
densities, which are fixed in each octave, in order to create conditions in
which self-conscious sub-Logoi could exist, this was carried out throughout
the growing flower-strewn field, as your simile suggests, of the one infinite
creation.
The first beings of mind, body, and spirit were not complex. The experience
of mind/body/spirits at the beginning of this octave of experience was
singular. There was no third-density forgetting. There was no veil. The
lessons of third density are predestined by the very nature of the vibratory
rates experienced during this particular density and by the nature of the
quantum jump to the vibratory experiences of fourth density.
Questioner: Am I correct, then, in assuming the first mind/body/spirit
experiences, as this galaxy progressed in growth, were those that moved

                                      60
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

through the densities; that is, the process we have discussed coming out of
second density. For instance, let us take a particular planet, one of the very
early planets formed near the center of the galaxy. I will assume that the
planet solidified during the first density, that life appeared in second
density, and that all of the mind/body/spirit complexes of third density
progressed out of second-density on that planet and evolved in third
density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is hypothetically correct.
Questioner: Did this in fact happen on some of the planets or on a large
percentage of the planets near the center of this galaxy in this way?
Ra: I am Ra. Our knowledge is limited. We know of the beginning but
cannot asseverate to the precise experiences of those things occurring before
us. You know the nature of historical teaching. At our level of
learn/teaching we may expect little distortion. However, we cannot, with
surety, say there is no distortion as we speak of specific occurrences of which
we were not consciously a part. It is our understanding that your
supposition is correct. Thus we so hypothesize.
Questioner: Specifically, I am trying to grasp an understanding of the
process of experience in third density before the veil so that I can better
understand the present process. As I understand, it the mind/body/spirits
went through the process of what we call physical incarnation in this density
but there was no forgetting. What was the benefit or purpose of the physical
incarnation when there was no forgetting?
Ra: I am Ra. The purpose of incarnation in third density is to learn the
ways of love.
Questioner: I guess I didn’t state that exactly right. What I mean is, since
there was no forgetting, since the mind/body/spirits had, in what we call the
physical incarnation, their full consciousness, they knew the same thing that
they would know while not in the physical incarnation. What was the
mechanism of teaching that taught the ways of love in the third-density
physical prior to the forgetting process?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask your permission to answer this query in an oblique
fashion as we perceive an area in which we might be of aid.
Questioner: Certainly.
Ra: I am Ra. Your queries seem to be pursuing the possibility/probability
that the mechanisms of experience in third density are different if a
mind/body/spirit is attempting them rather than a mind/body/spirit
complex. The nature of third density is constant. Its ways are to be learned
                                      61
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

the same now and ever. Thusly, no matter what form the entity facing these
lessons, the lessons and mechanisms are the same. The Creator will learn
from Itself. Each entity has unmanifest portions of learning and, most
importantly, learning which is involved with other-selves.
Questioner: Then prior to the forgetting process there was no concept of
anything but service-to-others polarization. What sort of societies and
experiences in third-density were created and evolved in this condition?
Ra: I am Ra. It is our perception that such conditions created the situation
of a most pallid experiential nexus in which lessons were garnered with the
relative speed of the turtle to the cheetah.
Questioner: Did such societies evolve with technologies of a complex
nature, or did they remain quite simple? Can you give me a general idea of
the evolvement that would be a function of what we would call intellectual
activity?
Ra: I am Ra. There is infinite diversity in societies under any circumstances.
There were many highly technologically advanced societies which grew due
to the ease of producing any desired result. When one dwells within what
might be seen to be a state of constant potential inspiration, that which
even the most highly sophisticated, in your terms, societal structure lacked,
given the noncomplex nature of its entities, was what you might call will or,
to use a more plebeian term, gusto, or élan vital.
Questioner: Did such technological societies evolve travel through what we
call space to other planets or other planetary systems? Did some of them do
this?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then even though, from our point of view, there was great
evolutionary experience it was deemed at some point by the evolving Logos
that an experiment to create a greater experience was appropriate. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and may benefit from comment. The Logos is
aware of the nature of the third-density requirement for what you have
called graduation. All the previous, if you would use this term, experiments,
although resulting in many experiences, lacked what was considered the
crucial ingredient; that is, polarization. There was little enough tendency for
experience to polarize entities that entities repeated habitually the third-
density cycles many times over. It was desired that the potential for
polarization be made more available.


                                      62
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

Questioner: Then since the only possibility at this particular time, as I see
it, was a polarization for service to others, I must assume from what you
said that even though all were aware of this service-to-others necessity they
were unable to achieve it. What was the configuration of mind of the
mind/body/spirits at that time? Why did they have such a difficult time
serving others to the extent necessary for graduation since this was the only
polarity possible?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider, if you will, the tendency of those who are divinely
happy, as you call this distortion, to have little urge to alter or better their
condition. Such is the result of the mind/body/spirit which is not complex.
There is the possibility of love of other-selves and service to other-selves, but
there is the overwhelming awareness of the Creator in the self. The
connection with the Creator is that of the umbilical cord. The security is
total. Therefore, no love is terribly important; no pain terribly frightening;
no effort, therefore, is made to serve for love or to benefit from fear.
Questioner: It seems that you might make an analogy in our present
illusion of those who are born into extreme wealth and security. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Within the strict bounds of the simile, you are perceptive.
Questioner: We have presently an activity between physical incarnations
called the healing and review of the incarnation. Was anything of this
nature occurring prior to the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. The inchoate structure of this process was always in place, but
where there has been no harm there need be no healing. This too may be
seen to have been of concern to Logoi which were aware that without the
need to understand, understanding would forever be left undone. We ask
your forgiveness for the use of this misnomer, but your language has a
paucity of sound vibration complexes for this general concept.
Questioner: I don’t grasp too well the condition of incarnation and the
time in between incarnations prior to the veil. I do not understand what
was the difference other than the manifestation of the third-density, yellow-
ray body. Was there any mental difference upon what we call death? I don’t
see the necessity for what we call the review of the incarnation if the
consciousness was uninterrupted. Could you clear up that point for me?
Ra: I am Ra. No portion of the Creator audits the course, to use your
experiential terms. Each incarnation is intended to be a course in the
Creator knowing Itself. A review or, shall we say, to continue the metaphor,
each test is an integral portion of the process of the Creator knowing Itself.
Each incarnation will end with such a test. This is so that the portion of the
                                       63
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

Creator may assimilate the experiences in yellow, physical, third density,
may evaluate the biases gained, and may then choose, either by means of
automatically provided aid or by the self, the conditions of the next
incarnation.
Questioner: Before the veil, during the review of the incarnation, were the
entities at that time aware that what they were trying to do was sufficiently
polarize for graduation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then I am assuming that this awareness was somehow reduced
as they went into the yellow ray third-density incarnative state even though
there was no veil. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is distinctly incorrect.
Questioner: OK. This is the central important point. It seems to me that if
polarization was the obvious thing that more effort would have been put
forward to polarize. Let me see if I can state this differently. Before the veil
there was an awareness of the need for polarization towards service to others
in third density by all entities, whether incarnate in third-density, yellow-
ray bodies or in between incarnations. I assume, then, that the condition of
which we earlier spoke, one of wealth you might say, was present through
the entire spectrum of experience whether it might be between incarnations
or during incarnations and the entities just simply could not manifest the
desire to create this polarization necessary for graduation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You begin to grasp the situation. Let us continue the
metaphor of the schooling but consider the scholar as being an entity in
your younger years of the schooling process. The entity is fed, clothed, and
protected regardless of whether or not the schoolwork is accomplished.
Therefore, the entity does not do the homework but rather enjoys playtime,
mealtime, and vacation. It is not until there is a reason to wish to excel that
most entities will attempt to excel.
Questioner: You have stated in a much earlier session that it is necessary to
polarize more than 50% service-to-others to be harvestable fourth-density
positive. Was this condition the same at the time before the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
The query is not answered easily, for the concept of service to self did not
hold sway previous to what we have been calling the veiling process. The
necessity for graduation to fourth density is an ability to use, welcome, and
enjoy a certain intensity of the white light of the one infinite Creator. In

                                      64
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 82

your own terms at your space/time nexus this ability may be measured by
your previously stated percentages of service.
Prior to the veiling process the measurement would be that of an entity
walking up a set of your stairs, each of which was imbued with a certain
quality of light. The stair upon which an entity stopped would be either
third-density light or fourth-density light. Between the two stairs lies the
threshold. To cross that threshold is difficult. There is resistance at the edge,
shall we say, of each density. The faculty of faith or will needs to be
understood, nourished, and developed in order to have an entity which
seeks past the boundary of third density. Those entities which do not do
their homework, be they ever so amiable, shall not cross. It was this
situation which faced the Logoi prior to the veiling process being
introduced into the experiential continuum of third density.
May we ask if there are any brief queries at this working?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to improve the contact or
make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. All parameters are being met. Remain united in love and
thanksgiving. We thank you for your conscientiousness as regards the
appurtenances.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the One Infinite
Glorious Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing merrily in the power and
the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                       65
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83
                               April 5, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Could you please tell me why the instrument now gains weight
after a session instead of losing it?
Ra: I am Ra. To assume that the instrument is gaining the weight of the
physical bodily complex due to a session or working with Ra is erroneous.
The instrument has no longer any physical material which, to any
observable extent, must be used in order for this contact to occur. This is
due to the determination of the group that the instrument shall not use the
vital energy which would be necessary since the physical energy complex
level is in deficit. Since the energy, therefore, for these contacts is a product
of energy transfer the instrument must no longer pay this physical price.
Therefore, the instrument is not losing the weight.
However, the weight gain, as it occurs, is the product of two factors. One is
the increasing sensitivity of this physical vehicle to all that is placed before
it, including that towards which it is distorted in ways you would call
allergic. The second factor is the energizing of these difficulties.
It is fortunate for the outlook of this contact and the incarnation of this
entity that it is not distorted towards the overeating as the overloading of
this much distorted physical complex would over-ride even the most fervent
affirmation of health/illness and turn the instrument towards the distortions
of illness/health or, in the extreme case, the physical death.
Questioner: Thank you. I’m going to ask a rather long, complex question
and I would request that the answer to each portion of this question be
given if there was a significant difference prior to the veil than following the
veil so that I can get an idea of how what we experience now is used for
better polarization.
What was the difference before the veil in the following while incarnate in
third density: sleep, dreams, physical pain, mental pain, sex, disease, catalyst
programming, random catalyst, relationships, and communication with the
higher self or with the mind/body/spirit totality or any other mind, body, or


                                       66
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

spirit functions before the veil that would be significant with respect to their
difference after the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, let us establish that both before and after the veil the
same conditions existed in time/space; that is, the veiling process is a
space/time phenomenon.
Secondly, the character of experience was altered drastically by the veiling
process. In some cases such as the dreaming and the contact with the higher
self, the experience was quantitatively different due to the fact that the
veiling is a primary cause of the value of dreams and is also the single door
against which the higher self must stand awaiting entry. Before veiling,
dreams were not for the purpose of using the so-called unconscious to
further utilize catalyst but were used to learn/teach from teach/learners
within the inner planes as well as those of outer origins of higher density. As
you deal with each subject of which you spoke you may observe, during the
veiling process, not a quantitative change in the experience but a qualitative
one.
Let us, as an example, choose your sexual activities of energy transfer. If you
have a desire to treat other subjects in detail please query forthwith. In the
instance of the sexual activity of those not dwelling within the veiling each
activity was a transfer. There were some transfers of strength. Most were
rather attenuated in the strength of the transfer due to the lack of veiling.
In the third density entities are attempting to learn the ways of love. If it
can be seen that all are one being it becomes much more difficult for the
undisciplined personality to choose one mate and, thereby, initiate itself
into a program of service. It is much more likely that the sexual energy will
be dissipated more randomly without either great joy or great sorrow
depending from these experiences.
Therefore, the green-ray energy transfer, being almost without exception the
case in sexual energy transfer prior to veiling, remains weakened and
without significant crystallization. The sexual energy transfers and blockages
after veiling have been discussed previously. It may be seen to be a more
complex study but one far more efficient in crystallizing those who seek the
green-ray energy center.
Questioner: Let’s take, then, since we are on the subject of sex, the
relationship before and after the veil of disease, in this particular case
venereal disease. Was this type of disease in existence prior to the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. There has been that which is called disease, both of this type
and others, before and after this great experiment. However, since the
venereal disease is in large part a function of the thought-forms of a
                                       67
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

distorted nature which are associated with sexual energy blockage the
venereal disease is almost entirely the product of mind/body/spirit
complexes’ interaction after the veiling.
Questioner: You mentioned that it existed in a small way prior to the veil.
What was the source of its development prior to the veiling process?
Ra: I am Ra. The source was as random as the nature of disease distortions
are, at heart, in general. Each portion of the body complex is in a state of
growth at all times. The reversal of this is seen as disease and has the benign
function of ending an incarnation at the appropriate space/time nexus. This
was the nature of disease, including that which you call venereal.
Questioner: I’ll make this statement and you can correct me.
As I see the nature of the action of disease before the veil, it seems to me
that the Logos had decided upon a program where an individual
mind/body/spirit would continue to grow in mind and the body would be
the third-density analog of this mind. The growth would be continual
unless there was an inability, for some reason, for the mind to continue
along the growth patterns. If this growth decelerated or stopped, what we
call disease would then act in a way so as to eventually terminate this
physical experience so that a new physical experience would be started, after
a review of the entire process had taken place between incarnations. Would
you clear up my thinking on that, please?
Ra: I am Ra. Your thinking is sufficiently clear on this subject.
Questioner: The thing I don’t understand is why, if there was no veil, the
review of the incarnation after the incarnation would help the process since
it seems to me that the entity should already be aware of what was
happening. Possibly this has to do with the nature of space/time and
time/space. Could you clear that up, please?
Ra: I am Ra. It is true that the nature of time/space is such that a lifetime
may be seen whole as a book or record, the pages studied, riffled through,
and re-read. However, the value of review is that of the testing as opposed
to the studying. At the testing, when the test is true, the distillations of all
study are made clear.
During the process of study, which you may call the incarnation, regardless
of an entity’s awareness of the process taking place, the material is diffused
and over-attention is almost inevitably placed upon detail.
The testing upon the cessation of the incarnative state is not that testing
which involves the correct memorization of many details. This testing is,
rather, the observing of self by self, often with aid as we have said. In this
                                        68
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

observation one sees the sum of all the detailed study; that being an attitude
or complex of attitudes which bias the consciousness of the
mind/body/spirit.
Questioner: Now before the veil an entity would be aware that he was
experiencing a disease. As an analogy would you give me, if you are aware of
a case, a disease an entity might experience prior to the veil and how he
would react to this and think about it and what effect it would have on
him?
Ra: I am Ra. Inasmuch as the universe is composed of an infinite array of
entities, there is also an infinity of response to stimulus. If you will observe
your peoples you will discover greatly variant responses to the same
distortion towards disease. Consequently, we cannot answer your query
with any hope of making any true statements since the over-generalizations
required are too capacious.
Questioner: Was there any uniformity or like functions of societies or social
organizations prior to the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. The third density is, by its very fiber, a societal one. There are
societies wherever there are entities conscious of the self and conscious of
other-selves and possessed with intelligence adequate to process information
indicating the benefits of communal blending of energies. The structures of
society before as after veiling were various. However, the societies before
veiling did not depend in any case upon the intentional enslavement of
some for the benefit of others, this not being seen to be a possibility when
all are seen as one. There was, however, the requisite amount of disharmony
to produce various experiments in what you may call governmental or
societal structures.
Questioner: In our present illusion we have undoubtedly lost sight of the
techniques of enslavement that are used since we are so far departed from
the pre-veil experience. I am sure that many of service-to-others orientation
are using techniques of enslavement even though they are not aware that
these are techniques of enslavement simply because they have been evolved
over so long a period of time and we are so deep into the illusion. Is this not
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Then you say that there are no cases where those who are of a
service-to-others orientation are using techniques of enslavement that have
grown as a result of the evolution of our social structures? Is this what you
mean?

                                       69
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

Ra: I am Ra. It was our understanding that your query concerned
conditions before the veiling. There was no unconscious slavery, as you call
this condition, at that period. At the present space/time the conditions of
well-meant and unintentional slavery are so numerous that it beggars our
ability to enumerate them.
Questioner: Then for a service-to-others oriented entity at this time
meditation upon the nature of these little-expected forms of slavery might
be productive in polarization I would think. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are quite correct.
Questioner: I would say that a very high percentage of the laws and
restrictions within what we call our legal system are of a nature of
enslavement of which I just spoke. Would you agree with this?
Ra: I am Ra. It is a necessary balance to the intention of law, which is to
protect, that the result would encompass an equal distortion towards
imprisonment. Therefore, we may say that your supposition is correct. This
is not to denigrate those who, in green and blue-ray energies, sought to free
a peaceable people from the bonds of chaos but only to point out the
inevitable consequences of codification of response which does not
recognize the uniqueness of each and every situation within your
experience.
Questioner: Is the veil supposed to be what I would call semi-permeable?
Ra: I am Ra. The veil is indeed so.
Questioner: What techniques and methods of penetration of the veil were
planned and are there any others that have occurred other that those
planned?
Ra: I am Ra. There were none planned by the first great experiment. As all
experiments, this rested upon the nakedness of hypothesis. The outcome
was unknown. It was discovered, experientially and empirically, that there
were as many ways to penetrate the veil as the imagination of
mind/body/spirit complexes could provide. The desire of mind/body/spirit
complexes to know that which was unknown drew to them the dreaming
and the gradual opening to the seeker of all of the balancing mechanisms
leading to adepthood and communication with teach/learners which could
pierce this veil.
The various unmanifested activities of the self were found to be productive
in some degree of penetration of the veil. In general, we may say that by far
the most vivid and even extravagant opportunities for the piercing of the
veil are a result of the interaction of polarized entities.
                                      70
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

Questioner: Could you expand on what you mean by that interaction of
polarized entities in piercing the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall state two items of note. The first is the extreme
potential for polarization in the relationship of two polarized entities which
have embarked upon the service-to-others path or, in some few cases, the
service-to-self path. Secondly, we would note that effect which we have
learned to call the doubling effect. Those of like mind which together seek
shall far more surely find.
Questioner: Specifically, by what process would, in the first case, two
polarized entities attempt to penetrate the veil, whether they be positively or
negatively polarized? By what technique would they penetrate the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. The penetration of the veil may be seen to begin to have its
roots in the gestation of green-ray activity, that all-compassionate love
which demands no return. If this path is followed the higher energy centers
shall be activated and crystallized until the adept is born. Within the adept
is the potential for dismantling the veil to a greater or lesser extent that all
may be seen again as one. The other-self is primary catalyst in this particular
path to the piercing of the veil, if you would call it that.
Questioner: What was the mechanism of the very first veiling process? I
don’t know if you can answer that. Would you try to answer that?
Ra: I am Ra. The mechanism of the veiling between the conscious and
unconscious portions of the mind was a declaration that the mind was
complex. This, in turn, caused the body and the spirit to become complex.
Questioner: Would you give me an example of a complex activity of the
body that we have now and how it was not complex prior to the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. Prior to the great experiment a mind/body/spirit was capable
of controlling the pressure of blood in the veins, the beating of the organ
you call the heart, the intensity of the sensation known to you as pain, and
all the functions now understood to be involuntary or unconscious.
Questioner: When the veiling process originally took place, then, it seems
that the Logos must have had a list of those functions that would become
unconscious and those that would remain consciously controlled. I am
assuming that if this occurred there was good reason for these divisions. Am
I in any way correct on this?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Would you correct me, please?


                                       71
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

Ra: I am Ra. There were many experiments whereby various of the
functions or distortions of the body complex were veiled and others not. A
large number of these experiments resulted in nonviable body complexes or
those only marginally viable. For instance, it is not a survival-oriented
mechanism for the nerve receptors to blank out unconsciously any
distortions towards pain.
Questioner: Before the veil the mind could blank out pain. I assume then,
that the function of the pain at that time was to signal the body to assume a
different configuration so that the source of the pain would leave, and then
the pain could be eliminated mentally. Is that correct, and was there
another function for the pain prior to the veiling?
Ra: I am Ra. Your assumption is correct. The function of pain at that time
was as the warning of the fire alarm to those not smelling the smoke.
Questioner: Then let’s say that an entity at that time burned its hand due
to carelessness. It would immediately remove its hand from the burning
object and then, in order to not feel the pain any more, its mind would cut
the pain off until healing had taken place. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: We would look at this in our present illusion as an elimination
of a certain amount of catalyst that would produce an acceleration in our
evolution. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The attitude towards pain varies from mind/body/ spirit
complex to mind/body/spirit complex. Your verbalization of attitude
towards the distortion known as pain is one productive of helpful
distortions as regards the process of evolution.
Questioner: What I was trying to indicate was that the plan of the Logos in
veiling the conscious from the unconscious mind in such a way that pain
could not so easily be controlled would have created a system of catalyst that
was not previously usable. Is this generally correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: In some cases it seems that this use of catalyst is almost in a
runaway condition for some entities in that they are experiencing much
more pain than they can make good use of as far as catalytic nature would
be considered. Could you comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last query of this working of a full length.
You may see, in some cases, an entity which, either by preincarnative choice
or by constant reprogramming while in incarnation, has developed an

                                     72
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 83

esurient program of catalyst. Such an entity is quite desirous of using the
catalyst and has determined to its own satisfaction that what you may call
the large board needs to be applied to the forehead in order to obtain the
attention of the self. In these cases it may indeed seem a great waste of the
catalyst of pain and a distortion towards feeling the tragedy of so much pain
may be experienced by the other-self. However, it is well to hope that the
other-self is grasping that which it has gone to some trouble to offer itself;
that is, the catalyst which it desires to use for the purpose of evolution. May
we ask if there are any brief queries at this time?
Questioner: I noticed you started this session with “I communicate now”
and you usually use “We communicate now.” Is there any significance or
difference with respect to that, and then is there anything that we can do to
make the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We am Ra. You may see the grammatical difficulties of your
linguistic structure in dealing with a social memory complex. There is no
distinction between the first person singular and plural in your language
when pertaining to Ra.
We offer the following, not to infringe upon your free will, but because this
instrument has specifically requested information as to its maintenance and
the support group does so at this querying. We may suggest that the
instrument has two areas of potential distortion, both of which may be
aided in the bodily sense by the ingestion of those things which seem to the
instrument to be desirable. We do not suggest any hard and fast rulings of
diet although we may suggest the virtue of the liquids. The instrument has
an increasing ability to sense that which will aid its bodily complex. It is
being aided by affirmations and also by the light which is the food of the
density of resting.
We may ask the support group to monitor the instrument as always so that
in the case of the desire for the more complex proteins that which is the
least distorted might be offered to the bodily complex which is indeed at
this time potentially capable of greatly increased distortion.
I am Ra. We thank you, my friends, for your continued conscientiousness
in the fulfilling of your manifestation of desire to serve others. You are
conscientious. The appurtenances are quite well aligned.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing merrily in the power and in
the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.



                                      73
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84
                             April 14, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex energy level of the instrument is in
sizable deficit. The vital energies are well.
Questioner: In the last session you mentioned the least distorted complex
protein for the instrument since its body complex was capable of greatly
increased distortion. Would you define the protein of which you spoke and
in which direction is the increased distortion, towards health or ill-health?
Ra: I am Ra. We were, in the cautionary statement about complex protein,
referring to the distortions of the animal protein which has been slaughtered
and preservatives added in order to maintain the acceptability to your
peoples of this non-living, physical material. It is well to attempt to find
those items which are fresh and of the best quality possible in order to avoid
increasing this particular entity’s distortions which may be loosely termed
allergic.
We were speaking of the distortion towards disease which is potential at this
space/time.
Questioner: The instrument asked the following question: Ra has implied
that the instrument is on the path of martyrdom, but since we all die are we
not all martyred to something, and when, if ever, does martyrdom partake
of wisdom?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a thoughtful query. Let us use as exemplar the one
known as Jehoshua. This entity incarnated with the plan of martyrdom.
There is no wisdom in this plan but rather understanding and compassion
extended to its fullest perfection. The one known as Jehoshua would have
been less than fully understanding of its course had it chosen to follow its
will at any space/time during its teachings. Several times, as you call this
measure, this entity had the possibility of moving towards the martyr’s place
which was, for that martyr, Jerusalem. Yet in meditation this entity stated,
time and again, “It is not yet the hour.” The entity could also have, when
the hour came, walked another path. Its incarnation would then have been
prolonged but the path for which it incarnated somewhat confused. Thusly,
one may observe the greatest amount of understanding, of which this entity

                                      74
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

was indeed capable, taking place as the entity in meditation felt and knew
that the hour had come for that to be fulfilled which was its incarnation.
It is indeed so that all mind/body/spirit complexes shall die to the third-
density illusion; that is, that each yellow-ray physical-complex body shall
cease to be viable. It is a misnomer to, for this reason alone, call each
mind/body/spirit complex a martyr, for this term is reserved for those who
lay down their lives for the service they may provide to others. We may
encourage meditation upon the functions of the will.
Questioner: The instrument asked if the restricted, unpublishable healing
information that was given during the first book could be included in Book
Four since readers who have gotten that far will be dedicated somewhat?
Ra: I am Ra. This publication of material shall, in time, shall we say, be
appropriate. There is intervening material.
Questioner: Going back to the previous session, you stated that each sexual
activity was a transfer before the veil. Would you trace the flow of energy
that is transferred and tell me if that was the planned activity or a planned
transfer by the designing Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. The path of energy transfer before the veiling during the
sexual intercourse was that of the two entities possessed of green-ray
capability. The awareness of all as Creator is that which opens the green
energy center. Thusly there was no possibility of blockage due to the sure
knowledge of each by each that each was the Creator. The transfers were
weak due to the ease with which such transfers could take place between any
two polarized entities during sexual intercourse.
Questioner: What I was getting at, precisely, was, for example, when we
close an electrical circuit it is easy to trace the path of current. It goes along
the conductor. I am trying to determine whether this transfer is between the
green energy centers (the heart chakras). I am trying to trace the physical
flow of the energy to try to get an idea of blockages after the veil. I may be
off on the wrong track here, but if I am wrong we’ll just drop it. Can you
tell me something about that?
Ra: I am Ra. In such a drawing or schematic representation of the circuitry
of two mind/body/spirits or mind/body/spirit complexes in sexual or other
energy transfer the circuit opens always at the red or base center and moves
as possible through the intervening energy centers. If baffled it will stop at
orange. If not, it shall proceed to yellow. If still unbaffled it shall proceed to
green. It is well to remember in the case of the mind/body/spirit that the
chakras or energy centers could well be functioning without crystallization.

                                        75
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

Questioner: In other words, they would be functioning but it would be
equivalent in an electrical circuitry to having a high resistance, shall we say,
and although the circuit would be complete, red through green, the total
quantity of energy transferred would be less. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We might most closely associate your query with the concept
of voltage. The uncrystallized, lower centers cannot deliver the higher
voltage. The crystallized centers may become quite remarkable in the high
voltage characteristics of the energy transfer as it reaches green ray and
indeed as green ray is crystallized this also applies to the higher energy
centers until such energy transfers become an honestation 4 for the Creator.
Questioner: Would you please correct me on this statement. I am guessing
that what happens is that when a transfer takes place the energy is that light
energy that comes in through the feet of the entity and the voltage or
potential difference is measured between the red energy center and, in the
case of the green ray transfer, the green energy center and then must leap or
flow from the green energy center of one entity to the green energy center
of the other, and then something happens to it. Could you clarify my
thinking on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would you please do that?
Ra: I am Ra. The energy transfer occurs in one releasing of the potential
difference. This does not leap between green and green energy centers but is
the sharing of the energies of each from red ray upwards. In this context it
may be seen to be at its most efficient when both entities have orgasm
simultaneously. However, it functions as transfer if either has the orgasm
and indeed in the case of the physically expressed love between a mated pair
which does not have the conclusion you call orgasm there is, nonetheless, a
considerable amount of energy transferred due to the potential difference
which has been raised as long as both entities are aware of this potential and
release its strength to each other by desire of the will in a mental or mind
complex dedication. You may see this practice as being used to generate
energy transfers in some of your practices of what you may call other than
Christian religious distortion systems of the Law of One.
Questioner: Could you give me an example of that last statement?
Ra: I am Ra. We preface this example with the reminder that each system is
quite distorted and its teachings always half-lost. However, one such system
is that called the Tantric Yoga.
4
    honestation: n. adornment; grace. [Obs.]

                                        76
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

Questioner: Considering individual A and individual B, if individual A
experiences the orgasm is the energy, then, transferred to individual B in a
greater amount? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is incomplete. Please restate.
Questioner: I am trying to determine whether the direction of energy
transfer is a function of orgasm. Which entity gets the transferred energy? I
know it’s a dumb question, but I want to be sure that I have it cleared up.
Ra: I am Ra. If both entities are well polarized and vibrating in green-ray
love any orgasm shall offer equal energy to both.
Questioner: I see. Before the veil can you describe any other physical
difference that we haven’t talked about yet with respect to the sexual energy
transfers or relationships or anything prior to veiling?
Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps the most critical difference of the veiling, before and
after, was that before the mind, body, and spirit were veiled, entities were
aware that each energy transfer and, indeed, very nearly all that proceeds
from any intercourse, social or sexual, between two entities has its character
and substance in time/space rather than space/time. The energies transferred
during the sexual activity are not, properly speaking, of space/ time. There
is a great component of what you may call metaphysical energy transferred.
Indeed, the body complex as a whole is greatly misunderstood due to the
post-veiling assumption that the physical manifestation called the body is
subject only to physical stimuli. This is emphatically not so.
Questioner: After the veil, in our particular case now, we have, in the
circuitry of which we were speaking, what you call blockages. Could you
describe what occurs with the first blockage and what its effects are on each
of the entities assuming that one blocks and the other does not or if both
are blocked?
Ra: I am Ra. This material has been covered previously. If both entities are
blocked both will have an increased hunger for the same activity, seeking to
unblock the baffled flow of energy. If one entity is blocked and the other
vibrates in love, the entity baffled will hunger still but have a tendency to
attempt to continue the procedure of satiating the increasing hunger with
the one vibrating green ray due to an impression that this entity might
prove helpful in this endeavor. The green-ray active individual shall polarize
slightly in the direction of service to others but have only the energy with
which it began.
Questioner: I didn’t mean to cover previously covered material. What I was
actually attempting to do was discover something new in asking the

                                      77
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

question, so please if I ask any questions in the future that have already been
covered don’t bother to repeat the material. I am just searching the same
area for the possibility of greater enlightenment with respect to this
particular area since it seems to be one of the major areas of experience in
our present condition of veiling that produces a very large amount of
catalyst and I am trying to understand, to use a poor term, how this veiling
process created a greater experience and how this experience evolved. These
questions are very difficult to ask.
It occurs to me that many statues or drawings of the one known as Lucifer
or the Devil are shown with an erection. Is this a function of orange-ray
blockage, and was this known in a minimal way by those who devised these
statues and drawings?
Ra: I am Ra. There is, of course, much other distortion involved in a
discussion of any mythic archetypical form. However, we may answer in the
affirmative and note that you are perceptive.
Questioner: With respect to the green, blue, and indigo transfers of energy,
how would the mechanism for these transfers differ from the orange-ray
mechanism in making them possible or setting the groundwork for them? I
know this is very difficult to ask and I may not be making any sense, but
what I am trying to do is gain an understanding of the foundation for the
transfers in each of the rays and the preparations for the transfers or the
fundamental requirements or biases and potentials for these transfers. Could
you expand on that for me please? I am sorry for the poor question.
Ra: I am Ra. We would take a moment to state in reply to a previous
comment that we shall answer each query whether or not it has been
previously covered for not to do so would be to baffle the flow of quite
another transfer of energy.
To respond to your query we firstly wish to agree with your supposition
that the subject you now query upon is a large one, for in it lies an entire
system of opening the gateway to intelligent infinity. You may see that some
information is necessarily shrouded in mystery by our desire to preserve the
free will of the adept. The great key to blue, indigo, and finally, that great
capital of the column of sexual energy transfer, violet energy, transfers, is the
metaphysical bond or distortion which has the name among your peoples of
unconditional love. In the blue-ray energy transfer the quality of this love is
refined in the fire of honest communication and clarity; this, shall we say,
normally speaking in general, takes a substantial portion of your space/time
to accomplish although there are instances of matings so well refined in
previous incarnations and so well remembered that the blue-ray may be
penetrated at once. This energy transfer is of great benefit to the seeker in
                                       78
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

that all communication from this seeker is, thereby, refined and the eyes of
honesty and clarity look upon a new world. Such is the nature of blue-ray
energy and such is one mechanism of potentiating and crystallizing it.
As we approach indigo-ray transfer we find ourselves in a shadowland. We
cannot give you information straight out or plain, for this is seen by us to be
an infringement. We cannot speak at all of violet ray transfer as we do not,
again, desire to break the Law of Confusion.
We may say that these jewels, though dearly bought, are beyond price for
the seeker and might suggest that just as each awareness is arrived at
through a process of analysis, synthesis, and inspiration, so should the seeker
approach its mate and evaluate each experience, seeking the jewel.
Questioner: Is there any way to tell which ray the transfer was for an
individual after the experience?
Ra: I am Ra. There is only a subjective yardstick or measure of such. If the
energies have flowed so that love is made whole, green-ray transfer has taken
place. If, by the same entities’ exchange, greater ease in communication and
greater sight has been experienced, the energy has been refined to the blue-
ray energy center. If the polarized entities, by this same energy transfer
experience, find that the faculties of will and faith have been stimulated, not
for a brief while but for a great duration of what you call time, you may
perceive the indigo-ray transfer. We may not speak of the violet-ray transfer
except to note that it is an opening to the gateway of intelligent infinity.
Indeed, the indigo-ray transfer is also this but, shall we say, the veil has not
yet been lifted.
Questioner: Did most Logoi plan, before the veil, to create a system of
random sexual activity or the specific pairing of entities for specific periods
of time, or did they have an objective in this respect?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
The harvest from the previous creation was that which included the male
and female mind/body/spirit. It was the intention of the original Logoi that
entities mate with one another in any fashion which caused a greater
polarization. It was determined, after observation of the process of many
Logoi, that polarization increased many fold if the mating were not
indiscriminate. Consequent Logoi thusly preserved a bias towards the mated
relationship which is more characteristic of more disciplined personalities
and of what you may call higher densities. The free will of each entity,
however, was always paramount and a bias only could be offered.



                                       79
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 84

May we ask if there may be any brief queries before we leave this
instrument?
Questioner: Is there any way that we can make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We would ask that each of the support group be especially
vigilant in the, what you would call, immediate future due to this
instrument’s unbidden but serious potential for increased distortion towards
illness/health.
You are most conscientious. We thank you, my friends, and leave you in the
glorious light and love of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore,
rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                     80
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85
                             April 26, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask your permission to preface this answer by the inclusion
of the greeting which we use.
Questioner: That is agreeable.
Ra: I am Ra. We greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We were having some difficulty with the channel of energy influx
due to pain flare, as you call this distortion of the physical body complex of
this instrument. Therefore, it was necessary to speak as briefly as possible
until we had safely transferred the mind/body/spirit complex of this
instrument. We beg your kind indulgence for our discourtesy which was
appropriate.
The condition of this instrument is as follows. The necessity for extreme
vigilance is less, due to the somewhat lessened physical complex energy
deficit. The potential for distortion remains and continued watchfulness
over the ingestion of helpful foodstuffs continues to be recommended.
Although the instrument is experiencing more than the, shall we say,
normal, for this mind/body/spirit complex, distortions towards pain at this
space/time nexus the basic condition is less distorted. The vital energies are
as previously stated.
We commend the vigilance and care of this group.
Questioner: What is the current situation with respect to our fifth-density,
service-to-self polarized companion?
Ra: I am Ra. Your companion has never been more closely associated with
you than at the present nexus. You may see a kind of crisis occurring upon
the so-called magical level at this particular space/time nexus.
Questioner: What is the nature of this crisis?
Ra: I am Ra. The nature of this crisis is the determination of the relative
polarity of your companion and your selves. You are in the position of
being in the third-density illusion and consequently having the conscious
collective magical ability of the neophyte, whereas your companion is most
adept. However, the faculties of will and faith and the calling to the light


                                      81
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85

have been used by this group to the exclusion of any significant
depolarization from the service-to-others path.
If your companion can possibly depolarize this group it must do so and that
quickly, for in this unsuccessful attempt at exploring the wisdom of
separation it is encountering some depolarization. This shall continue.
Therefore, the efforts of your companion are pronounced at this space/time
and time/space nexus.
Questioner: I am totally aware of the lack of necessity or rational need for
naming of entities or things, but I was wondering if this particular entity
had a name just so that we could increase our efficiency of communicating
with respect to him. Does he have a name?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would it be magically bad for us to know that name, or would
it make no difference?
Ra: I am Ra. It would make a difference.
Questioner: What would the difference be?
Ra: I am Ra. If one wishes to have power over an entity it is an aid to know
that entity’s name. If one wishes no power over an entity but wishes to
collect that entity into the very heart of one’s own being it is well to forget
the naming. Both processes are magically viable. Each is polarized in a
specific way. It is your choice.
Questioner: I am assuming that it would be a problem for the instrument
to meditate without the hand pressure from the other-self at this time
because of the continued greeting. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct if the instrument wishes to remain free from
this potential separation of its mind/body/spirit complex from the third
density it now experiences.
Questioner: Since our fifth-density companion has been monitoring our
communication with Ra it has been made aware of the veiling process of
which we have been speaking. It seems to me that conscious knowledge and
acceptance of the fact that this veiling process was used for the purpose for
which it was used would make it difficult to maintain high negative
polarization. Could you clear up my thinking on that, please?
Ra: I am Ra. We are unsure as to our success in realigning your modes of
mentation. We may, however, comment.



                                      82
                  The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85

The polarization process, as it enters fourth density, is one which occurs
with full knowledge of the veiling process which has taken place in third
density. This veiling process is that which is a portion of the third-density
experience. The knowledge and memory of the outcome of this and all
portions of the third-density experience informs the higher-density
polarized entity. It, however, does not influence the choice which has been
made and which is the basis for further work past third density in
polarization. Those which have chosen the service-to-others [service-to-self 5]
path have simply used the veiling process in order to potentiate that which
is not. This is an entirely acceptable method of self-knowledge of and by the
Creator.
Questioner: You just stated that those who are on the service-to-others path
use the veiling process to potentiate that which is not. I believe that I am
correct in repeating what you said. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then the service-to-others path has potentiated that which is
not. Could you expand that a little bit so that I could understand it a little
better?
Ra: I am Ra. If you see the energy centers in their various colors completing
the spectrum you may see that the service-to-others(self) choice is one
which denies the very center of the spectrum; that being universal love.
Therefore, all that is built upon the penetration of the light of harvestable
quality by such entities is based upon an omission. This omission shall
manifest in fourth density as the love of self; that is, the fullest expression of
the orange and yellow energy centers which then are used to potentiate
communication and adepthood.
When fifth-density refinement has been achieved that which is not is carried
further, the wisdom density being explored by entities which have no
compassion, no universal love. They experience that which they wish by free
choice, being of the earnest opinion that green-ray energy is folly.
That which is not may be seen as a self-imposed darkness in which harmony
is turned into an eternal disharmony. However, that which is not cannot
endure throughout the octave of third density and, as darkness eventually
calls the light, so does that which is not eventually call that which is.
Questioner: I believe that there were salient errors in the communication
that we just completed because of transmission difficulties. Are you aware of
these errors?
5
    Ra corrects this error in the next two answers.

                                          83
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85

Ra: I am Ra. We are unaware of errors although this instrument is
experiencing flares of pain, as you call this distortion. We welcome and
encourage your perceptions in correcting any errors in transmission.
Questioner: I think that the statement that was made when we were
speaking about the service-to-others path was incorrect. Would you check
that, please?
Ra: I am Ra. May we ask that you be apprised of our intention to have
spoken of the service-to-self path as the path of that which is not.
Questioner: I am interested in the problem that we sometimes have with
the transmission since the word “others” was used three times in this
transmission rather than the word “self.” Could you give me an idea of this
problem which could create a discrepancy in communication?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, we may note the clumsiness of language and our
unfamiliarity with it in our native, shall we say, experience. Secondly, we
may point out that once we have miscalled or misnumbered an event or
thing, that referent is quite likely to be reused for some transmission time,
as you call this measurement, due to our original error having gone
undetected by ourselves.
Questioner: Thank you. Do you have use of all the words in the English
language and, for that matter, all of the words in all of the languages that
are spoken on this planet at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: I have a question here from (name). It states: “As we see
compassion developing in ourselves is it more appropriate to balance this
compassion with wisdom or to allow the compassion to develop as much as
possible without being balanced”?
Ra: I am Ra. This query borders upon that type of question to which
answers are unavailable due to the free-will prohibitions upon information
from teach/learners.
To the student of the balancing process we may suggest that the most
stringent honesty be applied. As compassion is perceived it is suggested that,
in balancing, this perception be analyzed. It may take many, many essays
into compassion before true universal love is the product of the attempted
opening and crystallization of this all-important springboard energy center.
Thus the student may discover many other components to what may seem
to be all-embracing love. Each of these components may be balanced and
accepted as part of the self and as transitional material as the entity’s seat of
learn/teaching moves ever more clearly into the green ray.
                                       84
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85

When it is perceived that universal love has been achieved the next
balancing may or may not be wisdom. If the adept is balancing
manifestations it is indeed appropriate to balance universal love and
wisdom. If the balancing is of mind or spirit there are many subtleties to
which the adept may give careful consideration. Love and wisdom, like love
and light, are not black and white, shall we say, but faces of the same coin,
if you will. Therefore, it is not, in all cases, that balancing consists of a
movement from compassion to wisdom.
We may suggest at all times the constant remembrance of the density from
which each adept desires to move. This density learns the lessons of love. In
the case of Wanderers there are half-forgotten overlays of other lessons and
other densities. We shall leave these considerations with the questioner and
invite observations which we shall then be most happy to respond to in
what may seem to be a more effectual manner.
Questioner: What changes of functions of the mind/body/spirits were most
effective in producing the evolution desired due to the veiling process?
Ra: I am Ra. We are having difficulty retaining clear channel through this
instrument. It has a safe margin of transferred energy but is experiencing
pain flares. May we ask that you repeat the query as we have better channel
now.
Questioner: After the veiling process certain veiled functions or activities
must have been paramount in creating evolution in the desired polarized
directions. I was just wondering which of these had the greatest effect on
polarization?
Ra: I am Ra. The most effectual veiling was that of the mind.
Questioner: I would like to carry that on to find out what specific functions
of the mind were most effectual and the three or four most effective changes
brought about to create the polarization.
Ra: I am Ra. This is an interesting query. The primary veiling was of such
significance that it may be seen to be analogous to the mantling of the Earth
over all the jewels within the Earth’s crust; whereas previously all facets of
the Creator were consciously known. After the veiling, almost no facets of
the Creator were known to the mind. Almost all was buried beneath the
veil.
If one were to attempt to list those functions of mind most significant in
that they might be of aid in polarization, one would need to begin with the
faculty of visioning, envisioning, or far-seeing. Without the veil the mind


                                      85
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 85

was not caught in your illusory time. With the veil space/time is the only
obvious possibility for experience.
Also upon the list of significant veiled functions of the mind would be that
of dreaming. The so-called dreaming contains a great deal which, if made
available to the conscious mind and used, shall aid it in polarization to a
great extent.
The third function of the mind which is significant and which has been
veiled is that of the knowing of the body. The knowledge of and control
over the body, having been lost to a great extent in the veiling process, is
thusly lost from the experience of the seeker. Its knowledge before the
veiling is of small use. Its knowledge after the veiling, and in the face of
what is now a dense illusion of separation of body complex from mind
complex, is quite significant.
Perhaps the most important and significant function that occurred due to
the veiling of the mind from itself is not in itself a function of mind but
rather is a product of the potential created by this veiling. This is the faculty
of will or pure desire.
We may ask for brief queries at this time. Although there is energy
remaining for this working, we are reluctant to continue this contact,
experiencing continual variations due to pain flares, as you call this
distortion. Although we are unaware of any misgiven material we are aware
that there have been several points during which our channel was less than
optimal. This instrument is most faithful but we do not wish to misuse this
instrument. Please query as you will.
Questioner: I will just ask in closing: is an individualized portion or entity
of Ra inhabiting the instrument’s body for the purpose of communication?
Then, is there anything that we could do to improve the contact or to make
the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. We of Ra communicate through narrow band channel
through the violet ray energy center. We are not, as you would say,
physically indwelling in this instrument; rather, the mind/body/spirit
complex of this instrument rests with us.
You are diligent and conscientious. The alignments are excellent. We leave
you rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, then, my friends, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
infinite love and the ineffable light of the one Creator. I am Ra. Adonai.




                                       86
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86
                               May 4, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you first please give me the condition of the
instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument’s distortion towards physical energy complex
deficit has slightly increased since the last asking. The vital energy levels
have had significant calls upon them and are somewhat less than the last
asking also.
Questioner: What was the nature of the significant calls upon the vital
energy?
Ra: I am Ra. There are those entities which entertain the thought distortion
towards this entity that it shall remove for the otherselves all distortions for
the other-self. This entity has recently been in close contact with a larger
than normal number of entities with these thought complex distortions.
This entity is of the distortion to provide whatever service is possible and is
not consciously aware of the inroads made upon the vital energies.
Questioner: Am I correct in assuming that you are speaking of incarnate
third-density entities that were creating the condition of the use of the vital
energy?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: What is the present situation with our fifth-density service-to-
self polarized companion?
Ra: I am Ra. The period which you may call crisis remains.
Questioner: Can you tell me anything of the nature of this crisis?
Ra: I am Ra. The polarity of your companion is approaching the critical
point at which the entity shall choose either to retreat for the nonce and
leave any greetings to fourth-density minions or lose polarity. The only
other potential is that in some way this group might lose polarity in which
case your companion could continue its form of greeting.
Questioner: In the last session you had mentioned the properties
precipitating from the veiling of the mind; the first being envisioning or far-
seeing. Would you explain the meaning of that?

                                      87
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

Ra: I am Ra. Your language is not overstrewn with non-emotional terms for
the functional qualities of what is now termed unconscious mind. The
nature of mind is something which we have requested that you ponder.
However, it is, shall we say, clear enough to the casual observer that we may
share some thoughts with you without infringing upon your free
learn/teaching experiences.
The nature of the unconscious is of the nature of concept rather than word.
Consequently, before the veiling the use of the deeper mind was that of the
use of unspoken concept. You may consider the emotive and connotative
aspects of a melody. One could call out, in some stylized fashion, the terms
for the notes of the melody. One could say, quarter note A, quarter note A,
quarter note A, whole note F. This bears little resemblance to the beginning
of the melody of one of your composer’s most influential melodies, that
known to you as a symbol of victory.
This is the nature of the deeper mind. There are only stylized methods with
which to discuss its functions. Thusly our descriptions of this portion of the
mind, as well as the same portions of body and spirit, were given terms such
as “far-seeing,” indicating that the nature of penetration of the veiled
portion of the mind may be likened unto the journey too rich and exotic to
contemplate adequate describing thereof.
Questioner: You have stated that dreaming, if made available to the
conscious mind, will aid greatly in polarization. Could you define dreaming
or tell us what it is and how it aids polarization?
Ra: I am Ra. Dreaming is an activity of communication through the veil of
the unconscious mind and the conscious mind. The nature of this activity is
wholly dependent upon the situation regarding the energy center blockages,
activations, and crystallizations of a given mind/body/spirit complex.
In one who is blocked at two of the three lower energy centers dreaming
will be of value in the polarization process in that there will be a repetition
of those portions of recent catalyst as well as deeper held blockages, thereby
giving the waking mind clues as to the nature of these blockages and hints
as to possible changes in perception which may lead to the unblocking.
This type of dreaming or communication through the veiled portions of the
mind occurs also with those mind/body/spirit complexes which are
functioning with far less blockage and enjoying the green-ray activation or
higher activation at those times at which the mind/body/spirit complex
experiences catalyst, momentarily reblocking or baffling or otherwise
distorting the flow of energy influx. Therefore, in all cases it is useful to a


                                      88
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

mind/body/spirit complex to ponder the content and emotive resonance of
dreams.
For those whose green-ray energy centers have been activated as well as for
those whose green-ray energy centers are offered an unusual unblockage due
to extreme catalyst, such as what is termed the physical death of the self or
one which is beloved occurring in what you may call your near future,
dreaming takes on another activity. This is what may loosely be termed
precognition or a knowing which is prior to that which shall occur in
physical manifestation in your yellow-ray third-density space/time. This
property of the mind depends upon its placement, to a great extent, in
time/space so that the terms of present and future and past have no
meaning. This will, if made proper use of by the mind/body/spirit complex,
enable this entity to enter more fully into the all-compassionate love of each
and every circumstance including those circumstances against which an
entity may have a strong distortion towards what you may call unhappiness.
As a mind/body/spirit complex consciously chooses the path of the adept
and, with each energy balanced to a minimal degree, begins to open the
indigo-ray energy center the so-called dreaming becomes the most efficient
tool for polarization, for, if it is known by the adept that work may be done
in consciousness while the so-called conscious mind rests, this adept may
call upon those which guide it, those presences which surround it, and,
most of all, the magical personality which is the higher self in space/time
analog as it moves into the sleeping mode of consciousness. With these
affirmations attended to, the activity of dreaming reaches that potential of
learn/teaching which is most helpful to increasing the distortions of the
adept towards its chosen polarity.
There are other possibilities of the dreaming not so closely aligned with the
increase in polarity which we do not cover at this particular space/time.
Questioner: How is the dream designed or programmed? Is it done by the
higher self, or who is responsible for this?
Ra: I am Ra. In all cases the mind/body/spirit complex makes what use it
can of the faculty of the dreaming. It, itself, is responsible for this activity.
Questioner: Then you are saying that the subconscious is responsible for
what I will call the design or scriptwriter for the dream. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is the memory that the individual has upon waking from the
dream usually reasonably accurate? Is the dream easily remembered?


                                        89
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

Ra: I am Ra. You must realize that we are over-generalizing in order to
answer your queries as there are several sorts of dreams. However, in
general, it may be noted that it is only for a trained and disciplined observer
to have reasonably good recall of the dreaming. This faculty may be learned
by virtue of a discipline of the recording immediately upon awakening of
each and every detail which can be recalled. This training sharpens one’s
ability to recall the dream. The most common perception of a
mind/body/spirit complex of dreams is muddied, muddled, and quickly
lost.
Questioner: In remembering dreams, then, you are saying that the
individual can find specific clues to current energy center blockages and
may, thereby, reduce or eliminate those blockages. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is so.
Questioner: Is there any other function of dreaming that is of value in the
evolutionary process?
Ra: I am Ra. Although there are many which are of some value we would
choose two to note, since these two, though not of value in polarization,
may be of value in a more generalized sense.
The activity of dreaming is an activity in which there is made a finely
wrought and excellently fashioned bridge from conscious to unconscious. In
this state the various distortions which have occurred in the energy web of
the body complex, due to the misprision with which energy influxes have
been received, are healed. With the proper amount of dreaming comes the
healing of these distortions. Continued lack of this possibility can cause
seriously distorted mind/body/spirit complexes.
The other function of the dreaming which is of aid is that type of dream
which is visionary and which prophets and mystics have experienced from
days of old. Their visions come through the roots of mind and speak to a
hungry world. Thus the dream is of service without being of a personally
polarizing nature. However, in that mystic or prophet who desires to serve,
such service will increase the entity’s polarity.
Questioner: There is a portion of sleep that has been called REM. Is this
the state of dreaming?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: It was noticed that this occurs in small units during the night
with gaps in between. Is there any particular reason for this?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.

                                      90
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

Questioner: If it is of any value to know that would you tell me why the
dreaming process works like that?
Ra: I am Ra. The portions of the dreaming process which are helpful for
polarization and also for the vision of the mystic take place in time/space
and, consequently, use the bridge from metaphysical to physical for what
seems to be a brief period of your space/time. The time/space equivalent is
far greater. The bridge remains, however, and traduces each distortion of
mind, body, and spirit as it has received the distortions of energy influxes so
that healing may take place. This healing process does not occur with the
incidence of rapid eye movement but rather occurs largely in the space/time
portion of the mind/body/spirit complex using the bridge to time/space for
the process of healing to be enabled.
Questioner: You mentioned the loss of knowledge and control over the
body as being a factor that was helpful in the evolutionary process due to
veiling. Could you enumerate the important losses of knowledge and
control of the body?
Ra: I am Ra. This query contains some portions which would be more
helpfully answered were some intervening material requested.
Questioner: I’m at a loss to know what to request. Can you give me an idea
of what area of intervening material I should work on?
Ra: I am Ra. No. However, we shall be happy to answer the original query
if it is still desired if you first perceive that there is information lacking.
Questioner: Perhaps I can question slightly differently here. I might ask
why the loss of knowledge and control over the body was helpful?
Ra: I am Ra. The knowledge of the potentials of the physical vehicle before
the veiling offered the mind/body/spirit a free range of choices with regard
to activities and manifestations of the body but offered little in the way of
the development of polarity. When the knowledge of these potentials and
functions of the physical vehicle is shrouded from the conscious mind
complex, the mind/body/spirit complex is often nearly without knowledge
of how to best manifest its beingness. However, this state of lack of
knowledge offers an opportunity for a desire to grow within the mind
complex. This desire is that which seeks to know the possibilities of the
body complex. The ramifications of each possibility and the eventual biases
thusly built have within them a force which can only be generated by such a
desire or will to know.
Questioner: Perhaps you could give examples of the use of the body prior to
veiling and after the veiling in the same aspect to help us understand the

                                       91
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

change in knowledge of and control over the body more clearly. Could you
do this, please?
Ra: I am Ra. We could.
Questioner: Will you do this?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes. Let us deal with the sexual energy transfer. Before the
veiling such a transfer was always possible due to there being no shadow
upon the grasp of the nature of the body and its relationship to other
mind/body/spirits in this particular manifestation. Before the veiling process
there was a near total lack of the use of this sexual energy transfer beyond
green ray.
This also was due to the same unshadowed knowledge each had of each.
There was, in third density then, little purpose to be seen in the more
intensive relationships of mind, body, and spirit which you may call those
of the mating process, since each other-self was seen to be the Creator and
no other-self seemed to be more the Creator than another.
After the veiling process it became infinitely more difficult to achieve green-
ray energy transfer due to the great areas of mystery and unknowing
concerning the body complex and its manifestations. However, also due to
the great shadowing of the manifestations of the body from the conscious
mind complex, when such energy transfer was experienced it was likelier to
provide catalyst which caused a bonding of self with other-self in a properly
polarized configuration.
From this point it was far more likely that higher energy transfers would be
sought by this mated pair of mind/body/spirit complexes, thus allowing the
Creator to know Itself with great beauty, solemnity, and wonder. Intelligent
infinity having been reached by this sacramental use of this function of the
body, each mind/body/spirit complex of the mated pair gained greatly in
polarization and in ability to serve.
Questioner: Did any of the other aspects of loss of knowledge or control of
the body approach, to any degree in efficiency, the description which you
have just given?
Ra: I am Ra. Each function of the body complex has some potential after
the veiling to provide helpful catalyst. We did choose the example of sexual
energy transfer due to its central place in the functionary capabilities of the
body complex made more useful by means of the veiling process.
This instrument grows somewhat low in energy. We would prefer to retain
the maximal portion of reserved energy for which this instrument has given

                                      92
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 86

permission. We would, therefore, ask for one more full query at this
working.
Questioner: I would assume that the veiling of the sexual aspect was of great
efficiency because it is an aspect that has to do totally with a relationship
with an other-self. It would seem to me that the bodily veilings having to do
with other-self interaction would be more efficient when compared with
those only related to self, which would be lower in efficiency in producing
either positive or negative polarization. Am I correct in this assumption?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct to a great extent. Perhaps the most notable
exception is the attitude of one already strongly polarized negatively towards
the appearance of the body complex. There are those entities upon the
negative path which take great care in the preservation of the distortion
your peoples perceive as fairness/ugliness. This fairness of form is, of course,
then used in order to manipulate other-selves. May we ask if there are any
brief queries?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We are pleased that this instrument was more conscientious in
preparing itself for contact by means of the careful mental vibrations which
you call prayer. This enabled the channel to be free from the distortions
which the contact fell prey to during the last working.
We would suggest to the support group some continued care in the
regulating of the physical activities of the instrument. However at this nexus
it is well to encourage those activities which feed the vital energies as this
instrument lives in this space/time present almost completely due to the
careful adherence to the preservation of those mental and spiritual energies
which make up the vital energy complex of this entity. Each is
conscientious. The alignments are good.
We would caution the support group as to the physical alignment of the
appurtenance known as the censer. There has been some slight difficulty
due to variation in the pattern of the effluvium of this incense.
I am Ra. I leave you rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the love and in the light of the
one Creator. Adonai




                                      93
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87
                                May 12, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The distortions of the physical complex are unchanged. The
vital energy levels are greatly enhanced.
Questioner: Thank you. In considering what was mentioned in the last
session about the censer I have thought about the fact that the position of
the origin of the smoke changes approximately six inches horizontally.
Would it be better to have a censer in a single, horizontal smoking position?
Ra: I am Ra. This alteration would be an helpful one given that the censer is
virgin.
Questioner: What would be the optimum geometrical arrangement of
censer, chalice, and candle with respect to the Bible and table and the
positions that we now have them in?
Ra: I am Ra. Both chalice and candle occupy the optimal configuration
with respect to the book most closely aligned with the Law of One in the
distortion complexes of this instrument. It is optimal to have the censer to
the rear of this book and centered at the spine of its open configuration.
Questioner: Would a position directly between the chalice and the candle
be optimum, then, for the censer?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not an exact measurement since both chalice and
candle are irregularly shaped. However, speaking roughly, this is correct.
Questioner: Thank you. What is the present situation with respect to our
fifth-density negative companion?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity has withdrawn for a period of restoration of its
polarity.
Questioner: Would you expand upon the concept of the acquisition of
polarity by this particular entity, its use, specifically, of this polarity other
than the simple, obvious need for sixth-density harvest if this is possible,
please?
Ra: I am Ra. We would. The nature of the densities above your own is that
a purpose may be said to be shared by both positive and negative polarities.

                                        94
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

This purpose is the acquisition of the ability to welcome more and more the
less and less distorted love/light and light/love of the one infinite Creator.
Upon the negative path the wisdom density is one in which power over
others has been refined until it is approaching absolute power. Any force
such as the force your group and those of Ra offer which cannot be
controlled by the power of such a negative fifth-density mind/body/spirit
complex then depolarizes the entity which has not controlled other-self.
It is not within your conscious selves to stand against such refined power
but rather it has been through the harmony, the mutual love, and the
honest calling for aid from the forces of light which have given you the
shield and buckler.
Questioner: What is the environmental situation of this particular fifth-
density entity, and how does he work with fourth-density negative entities
in order to establish power and control; what is his particular philosophy
with respect to himself as Creator and with respect to the use of the first
distortion and the extension of the first distortion to the fourth-density
negative? I hope that this isn’t too complex a question.
Ra: I am Ra. The environment of your companion is that of the rock, the
cave, the place of barrenness, for this is the density of wisdom and that
which is needed may be thought and received. To this entity very little is
necessary upon the physical, if you will, or space/time complex of
distortions.
Such an entity spends its consciousness within the realms of time/space in
an attempt to learn the ways of wisdom through the utmost use of the
powers and resources of the self. Since the self is the Creator, the wisdom
density provides many informative and fascinating experiences for the
negatively polarized entity. In some respects one may see a more lucid early
attachment to wisdom from those of negative polarity as the nexus of
positions of consciousness upon which wisdom is laid is simpler.
The relationship of such an entity to fourth-density negative entities is one
of the more powerful and the less powerful. The negative path posits slavery
of the less powerful as a means of learning the desire to serve the self to the
extent that the will is brought to bear. It is in this way that polarity is
increased in the negative sense. Thus fourth-density entities are willing
slaves of such a fifth-density entity, there being no doubt whatsoever of the
relative power of each.
Questioner: A reflection of this could be seen in our density in many of
those leaders who instigate war and have followers who support, in total
conviction that the direction of conquest is correct. Is this correct?

                                      95
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

Ra: I am Ra. Any organization which demands obedience without question
upon the basis of relative power is functioning according to the above
described plan.
Questioner: One point that I am not clear on is the understanding and use
of the first distortion by fifth and fourth-density negative entities in
manipulating third-density entities. I would like to know how the first
distortion affects the attempts to carry out the conquest of third-density
entities and the attempt to add them, under the premise of the first
distortion, to their social memory complexes. Would you expand on that
concept, please?
Ra: I am Ra. This latter plan is not one of which fourth-density negative
social memory complexes are capable. The fourth-density habit is that of
offering temptations and of energizing preexisting distortions. Fourth-
density entities lack the subtlety and magical practice which the fifth-
density experience offers.
Questioner: It seems though that in the case of many UFO contacts that
have occurred on this planet that there must be some knowledge of and use
of the first distortion. The fourth-density entities have carefully remained
aloof and anonymous, you might say, for the most part, so that no proof in
a concrete way of their existence is available. How are they oriented with
respect to this type of contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We misperceived your query, thinking it was directed towards
this particular type of contact. The nature of the fourth-density’s observance
of the free will distortion, while pursuing the seeding of the third-density
thought patterns, is material which has already been covered. That which
can be offered of the negatively oriented information is offered. It is altered
to the extent that the entity receiving such negative information is of
positive orientation. Thus many such contacts are of a mixed nature.
Questioner: I’m sorry for getting confused on my question here in not
asking it correctly. There is a philosophical point of central importance that
I am trying to clear up here. It has to do with the fact that fourth-density
negative seems to be aware of the first distortion. They are in a nonveiled
condition, and they seem to use this knowledge of the first distortion to
maintain the situation that they maintain in contacts with this planet. I am
trying to extract their ability to understand the mechanism of the first
distortion and the consequences of the veiling process and still remain in a
mental configuration of separation on the negative path. I hope that I have
made myself clear there. I have had a hard time asking this question.


                                      96
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

Ra: I am Ra. The answer may still not satisfy the questioner. We ask that
you pursue it until you are satisfied. The fourth-density negative entity has
made the choice available to each at third-density harvest. It is aware of the
full array of possible methods of viewing the universe of the one Creator
and it is convinced that the ignoring and non-use of the green-ray energy
center will be the method most efficient in providing harvestability of
fourth density. Its operations among those of third density which have not
yet made this choice are designed to offer to each the opportunity to
consider the self-serving polarity and its possible attractiveness.
Questioner: It seems to me that this is a service-to-others action in offering
the possibility of the self-serving path. What is the relative effect of
polarization in this action? I don’t understand that.
Ra: I am Ra. In your armed bands a large group marauds and pillages
successfully. The success of the privates is claimed by the corporals, the
success of corporals by sergeants, then lieutenants, captains, majors, and
finally the commanding general. Each successful temptation, each successful
harvestable entity is a strengthener of the power and polarity of the fourth-
density social memory complex which has had this success.
Questioner: If one mind/body/spirit complex is harvested from third
density to a fourth-density social memory complex is the total power of the
social memory complex before the absorption of this single entity doubled
when this entity is absorbed?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: The Law of Doubling, then, does not work in this way. How
much does the power of the social memory complex increase relative to this
single entity that is harvested and absorbed into it?
Ra: I am Ra. If one entity in the social memory complex is responsible for
this addition to its being, that mind/body/spirit complex will absorb, in
linear fashion, the power contained in the, shall we say, recruit. If a sub-
group is responsible, the power is then this sub-group’s. Only very rarely is
the social memory complex of negative polarity capable of acting totally as
one being. The loss of polarity due to this difficulty, to which we have
previously referred as of kind of spiritual entropy, is quite large.
Questioner: Then assuming that a single negatively oriented entity is
responsible for the recruiting of a harvested third-density entity and adds its
polarity to his negative polarity and power, what type of ability or what type
of benefit is this and how is it used by the entity?


                                      97
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

Ra: I am Ra. The so-called pecking order is immediately challenged and the
entity with increased power exercises that power to control more other-
selves and to advance within the social memory complex structure.
Questioner: How is this power measured? How is it obvious that this entity
has gained this additional power?
Ra: I am Ra. In some cases there is a kind of battle. This is a battle of wills
and the weapons consist of the light that can be formed by each contender.
In most cases where the shift of power has been obvious it simply is
acknowledged and those seeing benefit from associating with this newly
more powerful entity aid it in rising within the structure.
Questioner: Thank you. We noticed a possibility of confusion between the
term “mind/body/spirit” and “mind/body/spirit complex” in the last
session. Were there a couple of misuses of those terms in shifting one for the
other?
Ra: I am Ra. There was an error in transmission. The use of the term
“mind/body/spirit” should refer to those entities dwelling in third density
prior to the veiling process, the term “mind/body/spirit complex” referring
to those entities dwelling in third density after the veiling process. We also
discover a failure on our part to supply the term “complex” when speaking
of body after the veiling. Please correct these errors. Also, we ask that you
keep a vigilant watch over these transmissions for any errors and question
without fail as it is our intention to provide as undistorted a series of sound
vibration complexes as is possible.
This entity, though far better cleared of distortions towards the pain flares
when prepared by those mental vibration complexes you call prayer, is still
liable to fluctuation due to its preincarnative body complex distortions and
the energizing of them by those of negative polarity.
Questioner: Thank you. We will make the corrections 6. In the last session
you made the statement that before the veiling, sexual energy transfer was
always possible. I would like to know what you meant by “it was always
possible” and why it was not always possible after the veiling, just to clear
up that point?
Ra: I am Ra. We believe that we grasp your query and will use the analogy
in your culture of the battery which lights the flashlight bulb. Two working
batteries placed in series always offer the potential of the bulb’s
illumination. After the veiling, to continue this gross analogy, the two
batteries being placed not in series would then offer no possible
6
    The text was corrected before publishing and now reads as it should.

                                         98
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

illumination of the bulb. Many mind/body/spirit complexes after the
veiling have, through blockages, done the equivalent of reversing the
battery.
Questioner: What was the primary source of the blockages that caused the
battery reversal?
Ra: I am Ra. Please query more specifically as to the mind/body/spirits or
mind/body/spirit complexes about which you request information.
Questioner: Before the veil there was knowledge of the bulb-lighting
technique, shall we say. After the veil some experiments created a bulb
lighting; some resulted in no bulb lighting. Other than the fact that
information was not available on methods of lighting the bulb, was there
some root cause of the experiments that resulted in no bulb lighting?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What was this root cause?
Ra: I am Ra. The root cause of blockage is the lack of the ability to see the
other-self as the Creator, or to phrase this differently, the lack of love.
Questioner: In our particular illusion the sexual potential for the male
seems to peak somewhere prior to the age twenty and the female’s peak is
some ten years later. What is the cause of this difference in peaking sexual
energy?
Ra: I am Ra. We must make clear distinction between the yellow-ray, third-
density, chemical bodily complex and the body complex which is a portion
of the mind/body/spirit complex. The male, as you call this polarity, has an
extremely active yellow-ray desire at the space/time in its incarnation when
its sperm is the most viable and full of the life-giving spermato. Thusly the
red ray seeks to reproduce most thickly at the time when this body is most
able to fulfill the red-ray requirements.
The yellow-ray, chemical body complex of the female, as you call this
polarity, must needs have a continued and increasing desire for the sexual
intercourse for it can only conceive once in one fifteen to eighteen month
period, given that it carries the conceived body complex, bears it, and
suckles it. This is draining to the physical body of yellow ray. To
compensate for this the desire increases so that the yellow-ray body is
predisposed to continue in sexual congress, thus fulfilling its red-ray
requirement to reproduce as thickly as possible.
The more, shall we say, integral sexuality or polarity of the body complex,
which is a portion of the mind/body/spirit complex, does not concern itself

                                      99
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

with these yellow-ray manifestations but rather follows the ways of the
seeking of energy transfer and the furthering of aid and service to others or
to the self.
Questioner: In addition, why is the ratio of male to female orgasms so
heavily loaded on the side of the male?
Ra: I am Ra. We refer now to the yellow-ray, physical body or, if you will,
body complex. At this level the distinction is unimportant. The male
orgasm which motivates the sperm forward to meet its ovum is essential for
the completion of the red-ray desire to propagate the species. The female
orgasm is unnecessary. Again, as mind/body/spirit complexes begin to use
the sexual energy transfer to learn, to serve, and to glorify the one infinite
Creator the function of the female orgasm becomes more clear.
Questioner: What was this ratio before the veil?
Ra: I am Ra. The ratio of male to female orgasms before the veil was closer
to one-to-one by a great deal as the metaphysical value of the female orgasm
was clear and without shadow.
Questioner: Is it meaningful to give this ratio in early fourth density and, if
so, would you do that?
Ra: I am Ra. In many ways it is quite meaningless to speak of orgasm of
male and female in higher densities as the character and nature of orgasm
becomes more and more naturally a function of the mind/body/spirit
complex as an unit. It may be said that the veil in fourth density is lifted
and the choice has been made. In positive polarities true sharing is almost
universal. In negative polarities true blockage so that the conqueror obtains
orgasm, the conquered almost never, is almost universal. In each case you
may see the function of the sexual portion of experience as being a most
efficient means of polarization.
Questioner: In our illusion we have physical definitions for possible
transfers of energy. We label them as the conversion of potential to kinetic
or kinetic to heat and examine this with respect to the increasing entropy.
When we speak of sexual energy transfers and other more basic forms of
energy I am always at a loss to properly use, you might say, the terms since I
am not understanding—and possibly can’t understand—the basic form of
energy that we speak of. However, I intuit that this is the energy of pure
vibration; that is, at the basic level of our illusion, that vibration between
the space and time portion of the space/time continuum and yet somehow
is transferred into our illusion in a more basic form than that. Could you
expand on this area for me, please?

                                      100
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 87

Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would you do that?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct in assuming that the energy of which we speak
in discussing sexual energy transfers is a form of vibratory bridge between
space/time and time/space. Although this distinction is not apart from that
which follows, that which follows may shed light upon that basic statement.
Due to the veiling process the energy transferred from male to female is
different than that transferred from female to male. Due to the polarity
difference of the mind/body/spirit complexes of male and female the male
stores physical energy, the female mental and mental/emotional energy.
When third-density sexual energy transfer is completed the male will have
offered the discharge of physical energy. The female is, thereby, refreshed,
having far less physical vitality. At the same time, if you will use this term,
the female discharges the efflux of its stored mental and mental/emotional
energy, thereby offering inspiration, healing, and blessing to the male which
by nature is less vital in this area.
At this time may we ask for one more full query.
Questioner: Why is the male and the female nature different?
Ra: I am Ra. When the veiling process was accomplished, to the male
polarity was attracted the Matrix of the Mind and to the female, the
Potentiator of the Mind, to the male the Potentiator of the Body, to the
female the Matrix of the Body. May we ask if there are any brief queries
before we close this working?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall find the suggested readjustment of the censer helpful.
The alignments are good. You have been conscientious, my friends. We
leave you now in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing merrily in the power and in the ineffable peace of
the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      101
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88
                              May 29, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex energy deficit is considerable at this
space/time. There has been also a significant loss of the vital energies.
However, these energies are still well within the distortion you may call
strength.
Questioner: Of all of the things that you have mentioned before for
replenishing these energies, at this particular space/time, which would be
most appropriate for the replenishing of both of these energies?
Ra: I am Ra. As you note, there are many factors which contribute to the
aiding of the strength distortions and the amelioration of distortions
towards weakness in this instrument. We suggest to each that those many
things which have been learned be conscientiously applied.
We would single out one physical distortion for discussion. The fourth-
density negative minions which visit your group at this time are energizing a
somewhat severe complex of imbalances in the manual appendages of this
instrument and, to a lesser extent, those distortions of the thoracic region.
We suggest care be taken to refrain from any unnecessary use of these
appendages. As this instrument will not appreciate this suggestion we
suggest the appropriate discussion.
Questioner: I assume from this that our fifth-density negative companion is
still on R and R. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Your fifth-density companion is not accompanying you at this
time. However, it is not resting.
Questioner: Is the censer that we have provided all right? It does go out
prior to the end of the session. Would it be better if it did not go out prior
to the end of the session?
Ra: I am Ra. The new configuration of the censer is quite helpful to the
more subtle patterns of energy surrounding these workings. It would be
helpful to have a continuously burning amount of cense. However, the
difficulty is in providing this without overpowering this enclosure with the
amount of effluvium and physical product of combustion. Having to
choose betwixt allowing the censer to finish its burning and having an
                                      102
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

overabundance of the smoke, we would suggest the former as being more
helpful.
Questioner: The instrument has mentioned what she refers to as bleed-
through or being aware, during these sessions sometimes, of the
communication. Would you comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. We have the mind/body/spirit complex of the instrument with
us. As this entity begins to awaken from the metaphorical crib of
experiencing light and activity in our density it is beginning to be aware of
the movement of thought. It does not grasp these thoughts any more than
your third-density infant may grasp the first words it perceives. The
experience should be expected to continue and is an appropriate outgrowth
of the nature of these workings and of the method by which this instrument
has made itself available to our words.
Questioner: The instrument mentioned a recurrence of the need to go to
the bathroom prior to the session. Is this because of the low vital energy?
Ra: I am Ra. It is part of the cause of the lowered vital energy level. This
entity has been sustaining a level of the distortion you call pain which few
among your peoples experience without significant draining of the energies.
Indeed, the stability of the entity is notable. However, the entity has thusly
become drained and further has felt other distortions such as those for a
variety of experiences accentuated, for this is one means of balancing the
inward-looking experience of the physical pain. Due to concern for this
entity such activities have been discouraged. This has further drained the
entity.
The will to be of service to the Creator through the means of offering itself
as instrument in these working, therefore, was given an opportunity for the
testing of resolve. This entity used some vital energy to fuel and replenish
the will. No physical energy has been used by the instrument, but the vital
energies were tapped so that this entity might have the opportunity to once
again consciously choose to serve the one infinite Creator.
Questioner: Our publisher requests pictures for the book, The Law of One,
that is going to press at this time. Would you comment on the advisability,
the benefit, or detriment, magical or otherwise, of us using pictures of this
particular setup, the instrument, and the appurtenances in the book?
Ra: I am Ra. The practical advisability of such a project is completely a
product of your discrimination. There are magical considerations.
Firstly, if pictures be taken of a working the visual image must needs be that
which is; that is, it is well for you to photograph only an actual working and

                                     103
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

no sham nor substitution of any material. There shall be no distortions
which this group can avoid any more than we would wish distortions in our
words.
Secondly, it is inadvisable to photograph the instrument or any portion of
the working room while the instrument is in trance. This is a narrow band
contact and we wish to keep electrical and electromagnetic energies constant
when their presence is necessary and not present at all otherwise.
Questioner: From what you … I’m sorry. Go ahead. If you meant to
continue, continue. If not, I’ll ask a question.
Ra: I am Ra. We wished to state, thirdly, that once the instrumental (?) is
aware that the picture-taking will be performed, that during the entire
picture-taking, whether before or after the working, the instrument be
required to continuously respond to speech, thus assuring that no trance is
imminent.
Questioner: From what you have told me, then, I have planned the
following: We will, after the session is complete and the instrument has
been awakened, and before moving the instrument, have the instrument
continually talk to us while I take pictures. In addition to this I will take
some other pictures as requested by the publisher. Is this the optimal filling
of this requirement?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes. We ask that any photographs tell the truth, that they be
dated, and shine with a clarity so that there is no shadow of any but genuine
expression which may be offered to those which seek truth. We come as
humble messengers of the Law of One, desiring to decrease distortions. We
ask that you, who have been our friends, work with any considerations such
as above discussed, not with the thought of quickly removing an
unimportant detail, but, as in all ways, regard such as another opportunity
to, as the adept must, be yourselves and offer that which is in and with you
without pretense of any kind.
Questioner: Thank you. I would like to ask you as to the initial production
of the tarot, where this concept was first formed and where the tarot was
first recorded?
Ra: I am Ra. The concept of the tarot originated within the planetary
influence you call Venus.
Questioner: Was the concept given to or devised for a training tool for
those inhabiting Venus at that time or was it devised by those of Venus as a
training tool for those of Earth?


                                     104
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

Ra: I am Ra. The tarot was devised by the third-density population of
Venus a great measure of your space/time in your past. As we have noted
the third-density experience of those of Venus dealt far more deeply and
harmoniously with what you would call relationships with other-selves,
sexual energy transfer work, and philosophical or metaphysical research.
The product of many, many generations of work upon what we conceived
to be the archetypical mind produced the tarot which was used by our
peoples as a training aid in developing the magical personality.
Questioner: I’ll make a guess that those of Venus of third density who were
the initial ones to partially penetrate the veil gleaned information as to the
nature of the archetypical mind and the veiling process and from this
designed the tarot as a method of teaching others. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It is so.
Questioner: I will also assume, and I may not be correct, that the present
list that I have of twenty-two names of the tarot cards of the Major Arcana
are not in exact agreement with Ra’s original generation of the tarot. Could
you describe the original tarot, first telling me if there were twenty-two
archetypes? That must have been the same. Were they the same as the list
that I read to you in a previous session or were there differences?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have stated previously, each archetype is a concept
complex and may be viewed not only by individuals but by those of the
same racial and planetary influences in unique ways. Therefore, it is not
informative to reconstruct the rather minor differences in descriptive terms
between the tarot used by us and that used by those of Egypt and the
spiritual descendants of those first students of this system of study.
The one great breakthrough which was made after our work in third density
was done was the proper emphasis given to the Arcanum Number Twenty-
Two which we have called The Choice. In our own experience we were
aware that such an unifying archetype existed but did not give that
archetype the proper complex of concepts in order to most efficaciously use
that archetype in order to promote our evolution.
Questioner: I will make this statement as to my understanding of some of
the archetypes and let you correct this statement. It seems to me that the
Significators of Mind, Body, and Spirit are acted upon in each of these by
the catalyst. This produces Experience which then leads to the
Transformation and produces the Great Way. This is the same process for
the mind, the body, and spirit. The archetypes are just repeated but act in a
different way as catalyst because of the differences of mind, body, and spirit
and produce a different type of experience for each because of the difference

                                     105
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

in the three. The Transformation is slightly different. The Great Way is
somewhat different but the archetypes are all basically doing the same thing.
They are just acting on three different portions of the mind/body/spirit
complex so that we can say that in making the Significator a complex
basically we have provided a way for Catalyst to create the Transformation
more efficiently. Would you correct that statement, please?
Ra: I am Ra. In your statement correctness is so plaited up with tendrils of
the most fundamental misunderstanding that correction of your statement
is difficult. We shall make comments and from these comments request that
you allow a possible realignment of conceptualization to occur.
The archetypical mind is a great and fundamental portion of the mind
complex, one of its most basic elements and one of the richest sources of
information for the seeker of the one infinite Creator. To attempt to
condense the archetypes is to make an erroneous attempt. Each archetype is
a significant ding an sich, or thing in itself, with its own complex of
concepts. While it is informative to survey the relationships of one
archetype to another it can be said that this line of inquiry is secondary to
the discovery of the purest gestalt or vision or melody which each archetype
signifies to both the intellectual and intuitive mind.
The Significators of Mind, Body, and Spirit complexes are complex in and
of themselves, and the archetypes of Catalyst, Experience, Transformation,
and the Great Way are most fruitfully viewed as independent complexes
which have their own melodies with which they may inform the mind of its
nature.
We ask that you consider that the archetypical mind informs those thoughts
which then may have bearing upon the mind, the body, or the spirit. The
archetypes do not have a direct linkage to body or spirit. All must be drawn
up through the higher levels of the subconscious mind to the conscious
mind and thence they may flee whither they have been bidden to go. When
used in a controlled way they are most helpful. Rather than continue
beyond the boundaries of your prior statement we would appreciate the
opportunity for your requestioning at this time so that we may answer you
more precisely.
Questioner: Did Ra use cards similar to the tarot cards for training in third-
density?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: What did Ra use in third density?



                                     106
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

Ra: I am Ra. You are aware in your attempts at magical visualization of the
mental configuration of sometimes rather complex visualizations. These are
mental and drawn with the mind. Another example well-known in your
culture is the visualization, in your mass, of the distortion of the love of the
one infinite Creator called Christianity, wherein a small portion of your
foodstuffs is seen to be a mentally configured but entirely real man, the man
known to you as Jehoshuah or, as you call this entity now, Jesus. It was by
this method of sustained visualization over a period of training that we
worked with these concepts.
These concepts were occasionally drawn. However, the concept of one
visualization per card was not thought of by us.
Questioner: How did the teacher relay information to the student in respect
to visualization?
Ra: I am Ra. The process was cabalistic; that is, of the oral tradition of
mouth to ear.
Questioner: Then when Ra attempted to teach the Egyptians the concept of
the tarot, was the same process used, or a different one.
Ra: I am Ra. The same process was used. However, those which were
teach/learners after us first drew these images to the best of their ability
within the place of initiation and later began the use of what you call cards
bearing these visualizations’ representations.
Questioner: Were the Court Arcana and the Minor Arcana a portion of
Ra’s teachings or was this something that came along later?
Ra: I am Ra. Those cards of which you speak were the product of the
influence of those of Chaldea and Sumer.
Questioner: You mentioned earlier that the tarot was a method of
divination. Would you explain that?
Ra: I am Ra. We must first divorce the tarot as a method of divination from
this Major Arcana as representative of twenty-two archetypes of the
archetypical mind.
The value of that which you call astrology is significant when used by those
initiated entities which understand, if you will pardon the misnomer, the
sometimes intricate considerations of the Law of Confusion. As each
planetary influence enters the energy web of your sphere those upon the
sphere are moved much as the moon which moves about your sphere moves
the waters upon your deeps. Your own nature is water in that you as
mind/body/spirit complexes are easily impressed and moved. Indeed, this is

                                      107
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

the very fiber and nature of your journey and vigil in this density: to not
only be moved but to instruct yourself as to the preferred manner of your
movement in mind, body, and spirit.
Therefore, as each entity enters the planetary energy web each entity
experiences two major planetary influxes, that of the conception, which has
to do with the physical, yellow-ray manifestation of the incarnation, and
that of the moment you call birth when the breath is first drawn into the
body complex of chemical yellow ray. Thus those who know the stars and
their configurations and influences are able to see a rather broadly drawn
map of the country through which an entity has traveled, is traveling, or
may be expected to travel, be it upon the physical, the mental, or the
spiritual level. Such an entity will have developed abilities of the initiate
which are normally known among your peoples as psychic or paranormal.
When the archetypes are shuffled into the mix of astrologically oriented
cards which form the so-called Court Arcana and Minor Arcana these
archetypes become magnetized to the psychic impressions of the one
working with the cards, and thusly become instruments of a linkage
between the practitioner of the astrological determinations and divinations
and the one requesting information. Oft times such archetypical
representations will appear in such a manner as to have seemingly
interesting results, meaningful in configuration to the questioner. In and of
themselves, the Major Arcana have no rightful place in divination but,
rather, are tools for the further knowledge of the self by the self for the
purpose of entering a more profoundly, acutely realized present moment.
Questioner: Ra must have had, shall we say, a lesson plan or course of
training for the twenty-two archetypes to be given either to those of third
density of Ra or, later on, to those in Egypt. Could you describe this
scenario for the training course?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last full query of this working.
We find it more nearly appropriate to discuss our plans in acquainting
initiates upon your own planet with this particular version of the archetypes
of the archetypical mind. Our first stage was the presentation of the images,
one after the other, in the following order: one, eight, fifteen; two, nine,
sixteen; three, ten, seventeen; four, eleven, eighteen; five, twelve, nineteen;
six, thirteen, twenty; seven, fourteen, twenty-one; twenty-two. In this way
the fundamental relationships between mind, body, and spirit could begin
to be discovered, for as one sees, for instance, the Matrix of the Mind in
comparison to the Matrices of Body and Spirit one may draw certain
tentative conclusions.

                                      108
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 88

When, at length, the student had mastered these visualizations and had
considered each of the seven classifications of archetype, looking at the
relationships between mind, body, and spirit, we then suggested
consideration of archetypes in pairs: one and two; three and four; five; six
and seven. You may continue in this form for the body and spirit
archetypes. You will note that the consideration of the Significator was left
unpaired, for the Significator shall be paired with Archetype Twenty-Two.
At the end of this line of inquiry the student was beginning to grasp more
and more deeply the qualities and resonances of each archetype. At this
point, using various other aids to spiritual evolution, we encouraged the
initiate to learn to become each archetype and, most importantly, to know
as best as possible within your illusion when the adoption of the archetype’s
persona would be spiritually or metaphysically helpful.
As you can see, much work was done creatively by each initiate. We have no
dogma to offer. Each perceives that which is needful and helpful to the self.
May we ask if there are any brief queries before we leave this working?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to improve the contact or to
make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. We, again, ward you concerning the distortions of the
instrument’s hands. The fourth-density influence upon them could be
inconvenient in that, if allowed to proceed without abatement, what you
call your surgery shall be almost immediately necessary.
The alignments are good. You have been fastidious. We leave you, my
friends, in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth,
therefore, rejoicing merrily in the power and in the glorious peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      109
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89
                                June 9, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: I have two questions, the first of which is: during the last
intensive meditation here the instrument experienced very strong
conditioning from an entity which did not identify itself and which did not
leave when she asked it to. Would you tell us what was occurring then?
Ra: I am Ra. We find the instrument to have been given the opportunity to
become a channel for a previously known friend. This entity was not able to
answer the questioning of spirits in the name of Christ as is this
instrument’s distortion of the means of differentiating betwixt those of
positive and those of negative orientation. Therefore, after some resistance,
the entity found the need to take its leave.
Questioner: Was this particular entity the fifth-density visitor that we have
had quite often previously?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is he back with us at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. No. The attempt to speak was due to the vigilant eye of the
minions of this entity which noted what one may call a surge of natural
telepathic ability upon the part of the instrument. This ability is cyclical, of
the eighteen-diurnal period cycle, as we have mentioned aforetimes. Thusly,
this entity determined to attempt another means of access to the instrument
by free will.
Questioner: Was this what I would refer to as an increased ability to receive
telepathically over a broader range of basic frequencies so as to include not
only the Confederation but also this entity?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The high point of the cycle sharpens the
ability to pick up the signal but does not change the basic nature of the
carrier wave. Shall we say, there is greater power in the receiving antennae.
Questioner: This question may be meaningless but would a fifth-density
entity of the Confederation who was positively polarized transmit on the
same frequency as our negatively polarized fifth-density companion?
                                      110
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and is the reason that the questioning of all
contacts is welcomed by the Confederation of Planets in the Service of the
Infinite Creator.
Questioner: Question two: (name) has also felt some conditioning which
was unbidden while channeling Latwii recently and in his personal
meditations. Could you also tell us what occurred in these cases?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity which has been companion has a vibratory
frequency but a small amount lesser than that of the social memory complex
known as Latwii. Also, Latwii is the primary Comforter of the
Confederation for entities seeking at the vibratory complex level of the one
known as (name). Therefore, this same companion has been attempting the
contact of this instrument also, although this instrument would have great
difficulty in distinguishing the actual contact due to the lack of experience
of your companion at this type of service. Nevertheless, it is well that this
instrument also choose some manner of the challenging of contacts.
Questioner: How many of our years ago was Ra’s third density ended?
Ra: I am Ra. The calculations necessary for establishing this point are
difficult since so much of what you call time is taken up before and after
third density as you see the progress of time from your vantage point. We
may say in general that the time of our enjoyment of the choice-making was
approximately 2.6 million of your sun-years in your past. However—we
correct this instrument. Your term is billion, 2.6 billion of your years in
your past. However, this time, as you call it, is not meaningful for our
intervening space/time has been experienced in a manner quite unlike your
third-density experience of space/time.
Questioner: It appears that the end of Ra’s third density coincided with the
beginning of this planet’s second density. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is roughly correct.
Questioner: Did the planet Venus become a fourth-density planet at that
time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is so.
Questioner: Did it later, then, become a fifth-density planet?
Ra: I am Ra. It later became a fourth/fifth-density planet; then, later a fifth-
density planet for a large measure of your time. Both fourth and fifth-
density experiences were possible upon the planetary influence of what you
call Venus.
Questioner: What is its density at present?
                                        111
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Ra: I am Ra. Its core vibrational frequency is sixth density. However we, as
a social memory complex have elected to leave that influence. Therefore, the
beings inhabiting this planetary influence at this space/time are fifth-density
entities. The planet may be considered a fifth/sixth-density planet.
Questioner: What was your reason for leaving?
Ra: I am Ra. We wished to be of service.
Questioner: I have here a deck of twenty-two tarot cards which have been
copied, according to information we have, from the walls of the large
pyramid at Giza. If necessary we can duplicate these cards in the book
which we are preparing. I would ask Ra if these cards represent an exact
replica of that which is in the Great Pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. The resemblance is substantial.
Questioner: In other words, you might say that these were better than 95%
correct as far as representing what is on the walls of the Great Pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: The way that I understand this, then, Ra gave these
archetypical concepts to the priests of Egypt who then drew them upon the
walls of one of the chambers of the Great Pyramid. What was the technique
of transmission of this information to the priests? At this time was Ra
walking the surface among the Egyptians, or was this done through some
form of channeling?
Ra: I am Ra. This was done partially through old teachings and partially
through visions.
Questioner: Then at this particular time Ra had long since vacated the
planet as far as walking among the Egyptians. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: I would like to question Ra on each of these cards in order to
better understand the archetypes. Is this agreeable?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have previously stated, these archetypical concept
complexes are a tool for learn/teaching. Thusly, if we were to offer
information that were not a response to observations of the student we
would be infringing upon the free will of the learn/teacher by being
teach/learner and learn/teacher at once.
Questioner: You stated that Ra used the tarot to develop the magical
personality. Was this done to mentally become the essence of each
archetype and in this way develop the magical personality?
                                      112
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The clothing one’s self within the archetype
is an advanced practice of the adept which has long studied this archetypical
system. The concept complexes which together are intended to represent
the architecture of a significant and rich portion of the mind are intended
to be studied as individual concept complexes as Matrix, Potentiator, etc.,
in viewing mind/body/spirit connections and in pairs with some
concentration upon the polarity of the male and the female. If these are
studied there comes the moment when the deep threnodies and joyful
ditties of the deep mind can successfully be brought forward to intensify,
articulate, and heighten some aspect of the magical personality.
Questioner: You stated that each archetype is a concept complex. Would
you please define what you mean by that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. Upon the face of it such a definition is without merit, being
circular. A concept complex is a complex of concepts just as a molecule is a
complex structure made up of more than one type of energy nexus or atom.
Each atom within a molecule is its unique identity and, by some means, can
be removed from the molecule. The molecule of water can, by chemical
means, be caused to separate into hydrogen and oxygen. Separately they
cannot be construed to equal water. When formed in the molecular
structure which exemplifies water the two are irrefragably water.
Just in this way each archetype has within it several root atoms of
organizational being. Separately the overall structure of the complex cannot
be seen. Together the concept complex is irrefragably one thing. However,
just as it is most useful in grasping the potentials in your physical systems of
the constituted nature of water, so in grasping the nature of an archetype it
is useful to have a sense of its component concepts.
Questioner: In Archetype One, represented by tarot card number one, the
Matrix of the Mind seems to have four basic parts to the complex. Looking
at the card we have, first and most obvious, the Magician and what seems to
be an approaching star. A stork or similar bird seems to be in a cage. On top
of the cage seems to be something that seems to be very difficult at (?)
discern. Am I in any way correct in this analysis?
Ra: I am Ra. You are competent at viewing pictures. You have not yet
grasped the nature of the Matrix of the Mind as fully as is reliably possible
upon contemplation. We would note that the representations drawn by
priests were somewhat distorted by acquaintance with and dependence
upon the astrologically based teachings of the Chaldees.
Questioner: When Ra originally trained or taught the Egyptians about the
tarot did Ra act as teach/learners to a degree that Ra became learn/teachers?

                                      113
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Ra: I am Ra. This distortion we were spared.
Questioner: Then could you tell me what information you gave to the
Egyptian priests who first were contacted or taught with respect to the first
archetype? Is this possible for you to do within the limits of the first
distortion?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible. Our first step, as we have said, was to present the
descriptions in verbal form of three images: one, eight, fifteen; then the
questions were asked: “What do you feel that a bird might represent?”
“What do you feel that a wand might represent?” “What do you feel that
the male represents?” and so forth until those studying were working upon a
system whereby the images used became evocative of a system of concepts.
This is slow work when done for the first time.
We may note, with sympathy, that you undoubtedly feel choked by the
opposite difficulty, that of a great mass of observation upon this system, all
of which has some merit as each student will experience the archetypical
mind and its structure in an unique way useful to that student. We suggest
that one or more of this group do that which we have suggested in order
that we may, without infringement, offer observations on this interesting
subject which may be of further aid to those inquiring in this area.
We would note at this time that the instrument is having almost continuous
pain flares. Therefore, we ask that each of the support group be especially
aware of any misinformation in order that we may correct any distortions of
information the soonest possible.
Questioner: Now as I understand it, what you suggest as far as the tarot
goes is to study the writings that we have available and from those formulate
questions. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: I’m sorry that I didn’t understand exactly what you meant with
respect to this. Would it be appropriate then for me to answer the questions
with what I think is the meaning of the three items that you spoke of for
Card Number One and then Card Eight, etc.? Is this what you mean?
Ra: I am Ra. This is very close to our meaning. It was our intention to
suggest that one or more of you go through the plan of study which we have
suggested. The queries having to do with the archetypes as found in the
tarot after this point may take the form of observing what seem to be the
characteristics of each archetype, relationships between mind, body, and
spiritual archetypes of the same ranking such as Matrix, or archetypes as
seen in relationship to polarity, especially when observed in the pairings.

                                      114
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Any observations made by a student which have fulfilled the considerations
will receive our comment in return. Our great avoidance of interpreting, for
the first time, for the learn/teacher various elements of a picture upon a
piece of pasteboard is involved both with the Law of Confusion and with
the difficulties of the distortions of the pictures upon the pasteboard.
Therefore, we may suggest a conscientious review of that which we have
already given concerning this subject as opposed to the major reliance being
either upon any rendition of the archetype pictures or any system which has
been arranged as a means of studying these pictures.
Questioner: All right; I’ll have to do that. Ra stated that a major
breakthrough was made when proper emphasis was put on Arcanum
Twenty-Two. This didn’t happen until Ra had completed third density. I
assume from this that Ra, being polarized positively, probably had some of
the same difficulty that occurred prior to the veil in that the negative
polarity was not appreciated. That’s a guess. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In one way it is precisely correct. Our harvest was
overwhelmingly positive and our appreciation of those which were negative
was relatively uninformed. However, we were intending to suggest that in
the use of the system known to you as the tarot for advancing the spiritual
evolution of the self a proper understanding, if we may use this misnomer,
of Archetype Twenty-Two is greatly helpful in sharpening the basic view of
the Significator of Mind, Body, and Spirit and, further, throws into starker
relief the Transformation and Great Way of Mind, Body, and Spirit
complexes.
Questioner: Were some of Ra’s population negatively harvested at the end
of Ra’ s third density?
Ra: I am Ra. We had no negative harvest as such although there had been
two entities which had harvested themselves during the third density in the
negative or service-to-self path. There were, however, those upon the
planetary surface during third density whose vibratory patterns were in the
negative range but were not harvestable.
Questioner: What was Ra’s average total population incarnate on Venus in
third density?
Ra: I am Ra. We were a small population which dwelt upon what you
would consider difficult conditions. Our harvest was approximately 6
million 500 thousand mind/body/spirit complexes. There were
approximately 32 million mind/body/spirit complexes repeating third
density elsewhere.


                                     115
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Questioner: What was the attitude prior to harvest of those harvestable
entities of Ra with respect to those who were obviously unharvestable?
Ra: I am Ra. Those of us which had the gift of polarity felt deep
compassion for those who seemed to dwell in darkness. This description is
most apt as ours was a harshly bright planet in the physical sense. There was
every attempt made to reach out with whatever seemed to be needed.
However, those upon the positive path have the comfort of companions and
we of Ra spent a great deal of our attention upon the possibilities of
achieving spiritual or metaphysical adepthood or work in indigo ray
through the means of relationships with other-selves. Consequently, the
compassion for those in darkness was balanced by the appreciation of the
light.
Questioner: Would Ra have the same attitude toward the unharvestable
entities or would it be different at this nexus than at the time of harvest
from the third density?
Ra: I am Ra. Not substantially. To those who wish to sleep we could only
offer those comforts designed for the sleeping. Service is only possible to the
extent it is requested. We were ready to serve in whatever way we could.
This still seems satisfactory as a means of dealing with other-selves in third
density. It is our feeling that to be each entity which one attempts to serve is
to simplify the grasp of what service is necessary or possible.
Questioner: What techniques did the two negatively harvested entities use
for negative polarization upon such a positively polarized planet?
Ra: I am Ra. The technique of control over others and domination unto the
physical death was used in both cases. Upon a planetary influence much
unused to slaughter these entities were able to polarize by this means. Upon
your third-density environment at the time of your experiencing such
entities would merely be considered, shall we say, ruthless despots which
waged the holy war.
Questioner: Did these two entities evolve from the second density of the
planet Venus along with the rest of the population of Venus that became Ra
from second density to third?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: What was the origin of the two entities of which you speak?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities were Wanderers from early positive fifth
density.


                                      116
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Questioner: And though they had already evolved through a positive fourth
density they, shall we say, switched polarity in the reincarnating in third
density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What was the catalyst for their change?
Ra: I am Ra. In our peoples there was what may be considered, from the
viewpoint of wisdom, an overabundance of love. These entities looked at
those still in darkness and saw that those of a neutral or somewhat negative
viewpoint found such harmony, shall we say, sickening. The Wanderers felt
that a more wisdom-oriented way of seeking love could be more appealing
to those in darkness.
First one entity began its work. Quickly the second found the first. These
entities had agreed to serve together and so they did, glorifying the one
Creator, but not as they intended. About them were soon gathered those
who found it easy to believe that a series of specific knowledges and
wisdoms would advance one towards the Creator. The end of this was the
graduation into fourth-density negative of the Wanderers, which had much
power of personality, and some small deepening of the negatively polarized
element of those not polarizing positively. There was no negative harvest as
such.
Questioner: What was the reason for the wandering of these two
Wanderers, and were they male and female?
Ra: I am Ra. All Wanderers come to be of assistance in serving the Creator,
each in its own way. The Wanderers of which we have been speaking were
indeed incarnated male and female as this is by far the most efficient system
of partnership.
Questioner: As a wild guess, one of these entities wouldn’t be the one who
has been our companion here for some time would it?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Then from what you say I am guessing that these Wanderers
returned or wandered to Ra’s third density possibly to seed greater wisdom
in what they saw as an overabundance of compassion in the Ra culture. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect in the sense that before incarnation it was the
desire of these Wanderers only to aid in service to others. The query has
correctness when seen from the viewpoint of the Wanderers within that
incarnation.

                                     117
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Questioner: I just can’t understand why they would think that a planet that
was doing as well as the population of Venus was doing as far as I can tell
would need Wanderers in order to help with the harvest. Was this at an
early point in Ra’s third density?
Ra: I am Ra. It was in the second cycle of 25,000 years. We had a harvest of
six out of thirty, to speak roughly, of millions of mind/body/spirit
complexes, less than 20%. Wanderers are always drawn to whatever
percentage has not yet polarized, and come when there is a call. There was a
call from those which were not positively polarized as such but which
sought to be positively polarized and sought wisdom, feeling the
compassion of other-selves upon Venus as complacent or pitying towards
other-selves.
Questioner: What was the attitude of these two entities after they graduated
into-fourth density negative and, the veil being removed, realized that they
had switched polarities?
Ra: I am Ra. They were disconcerted.
Questioner: Then did they continue striving to polarize negatively for a
fifth-density harvest in the negative sense or did they do something else?
Ra: I am Ra. They worked with the fourth-density negative for some period
until, within this framework, the previously learned patterns of the self had
been recaptured and the polarity was, with great effort, reversed. There was
a great deal of fourth-density positive work then to be retraced.
Questioner: How is Ra aware of this information? By what means does Ra
know the precise orientation of these two entities in fourth-density negative,
etc?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities joined Ra in fourth-density positive for a
portion of the cycle which we experienced.
Questioner: I assume, then, that they came in late. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: I didn’t mean to get so far off the track of my original
direction, but I think that some of these excursions are enlightening and
will help in understanding the basic mechanisms that we are so interested in
in evolution.
Ra stated that archetypes are helpful when used in a controlled way. Would
you give me an example of what you mean by using an archetype in a
controlled way?

                                     118
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 89

Ra: I am Ra. We speak with some regret in stating that this shall be our last
query of length. There is substantial energy left but this instrument has
distortions that rapidly approach the limit of our ability to maintain secure
contact.
The controlled use of the archetypes is that which is done within the self for
the polarization of the self and to the benefit of the self, if negatively
polarized, or others, if positively polarized, upon the most subtle of levels.
Keep in mind at all times that the archetypical mind is a portion of the deep
mind and informs thought processes. When the archetype is translated
without regard for magical propriety into the manifested daily actions of an
individual the greatest distortions may take place and great infringement
upon the free will of others is possible. This is more nearly acceptable to one
negatively polarized. However, the more carefully polarized of negative
mind/body/spirit complexes will also prefer to work with a finely tuned
instrument. May we ask if there are any brief queries before we leave this
working?
Questioner: I’ll just make the statement that I perceive that a negative
polarity harvest is possible with less negativity in the environment like Ra’s
environment than in the environment such as we have at present and ask if
that is correct, and then is there anything that we can do to improve the
contact or the comfort of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, the requirements of harvest are set. It is, however,
easier to serve the self completely or nearly so if there is little resistance.
In the matter of the nurturing of the instrument we suggest further
manipulation of the dorsal side and appendages of this instrument and the
whirling of the waters, if possible. The alignments are conscientious. We ask
for your vigilance in alignments and preparations. All is well, my friends.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                        119
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90
                               June 19, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex energy deficit is somewhat increased by
continued distortions towards pain. The vital energy levels are as previously
stated, having fluctuated slightly between askings.
Questioner: Could you tell me the situation with respect to our fourth and
fifth-density companions at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth-density league of companions accompanies your
group. The fifth-density friend, at this space/time nexus, works within its
own density exclusively.
Questioner: By what means do these particular fourth-density entities get
from their origin to our position?
Ra: I am Ra. The mechanism of calling has been previously explored. When
a distortion which may be negatively connotated is effected, this calling
occurs. In addition, the light of which we have spoken, emanating from
attempts to be of service to others in a fairly clear and lucid sense, is another
type of calling in that it represents that which requires balance by
temptation. Thirdly, there have been certain avenues into the
mind/body/spirit complexes of this group which have been made available
by your fifth-density friend.
Questioner: Actually, the question that I intended was how do they get
here? By what means of moving do they get here?
Ra: I am Ra. In the mechanism of the calling the movement is as you would
expect; that is, the entities are within your planetary influence and are,
having come through the quarantine web, free to answer such calling.
The temptations are offered by those negative entities of what you would
call your inner planes. These, shall we say, dark angels have been impressed
by the service-to-self path offered by those which have come through
quarantine from days of old and these entities, much like your angelic
presences of the positive nature, are ready to move in thought within the
inner planes of this planetary influence working from time/space to
space/time.

                                      120
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

The mechanism of the fifth-density entity is from density to density and is
magical in nature. The fourth density, of itself, is not capable of building
the highway into the energy web. However, it is capable of using that which
has been left intact. These entities are, again, the Orion entities of fourth
density.
Questioner: You stated previously that fifth-density entities bear a
resemblance to those of us in third density on planet Earth but fourth
density does not. Could you describe the fourth-density entities and tell me
why they do not resemble us?
Ra: I am Ra. The description must be bated under the Law of Confusion.
The cause for a variety of so-called physical vehicles is the remaining variety
of heritages from second-density physical vehicular forms. The process of
what you call physical evolution continues to hold sway into fourth density.
Only when the ways of wisdom have begun to refine the power of what you
may loosely call thought is the form of the physical complex manifestation
more nearly under the direction of the consciousness.
Questioner: If the population of this planet presently looks similar to fifth-
density entities I was wondering why this is? If I understand you correctly
the process of evolution would normally be that of third density resembling
that from which evolved in second density and refining it in fourth and
then again in fifth density, becoming what the population of this looks like
in the third density. It seems to me that this planet is ahead of itself by the
way that its mind/body/spirit complex or body complex looks. What is the
reason for this?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is based upon a misconception. Do you wish us to
comment or do you wish to requestion?
Questioner: Please comment on my misconception if that is possible.
Ra: I am Ra. In fifth density the manifestation of the physical complex is
more and more under the control of the conscious mind complex.
Therefore, the fifth-density entity may dissolve one manifestation and create
another. Consequently, the choice of a fifth-density entity or complex of
entities wishing to communicate with your peoples would be to resemble
your peoples’ physical-complex, chemical, yellow-ray vehicles.
Questioner: I see. Very roughly, if you were to move a third-density entity
from some other planet to this planet, what percentage of all of those within
the knowledge of Ra would look enough like entities of Earth so that they
would go unnoticed in a crowd?
Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps five percent.

                                      121
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

Questioner: Then there is an extreme variation in the form of the physical
vehicle in third density in the universe. I assume that this is also true of
fourth density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is so. We remind you that it is a great theoretical distance
between demanding that the creatures of an infinite creation be
unnoticeably similar to one’s self and observing those signs which may be
called human which denote the third-density characteristics of self-
consciousness, the grouping into pairs, societal groups, and races, and the
further characteristic means of using self-consciousness to refine and search
for the meaning of the milieu.
Questioner: Within Ra’s knowledge of the third-density physical forms,
what percentage would be similar enough to this planet’s physical forms
that we would assume the entities to be human even though they were a bit
different? This would have to be very rough because of my definition’s
being very rough.
Ra: I am Ra. This percentage is still small; perhaps thirteen to fifteen
percent due to the capabilities of various second-density life forms to carry
out each necessary function for third-density work. Thusly to be observed
would be behavior indicating self-consciousness and purposeful interaction
with a sentient ambiance about the entity rather than those characteristics
which familiarly connote to your peoples the humanity of your third-
density form.
Questioner: Now in this line of questioning I am trying to link to the
creations of various Logoi and their original use of a system of archetypes in
their creation and I apologize for a lack of efficiency in doing this, but I find
this somewhat difficult. For this particular Logos in the beginning, prior to
its creation of the first density, did the archetypical system which it had
chosen include the forms that would evolve in third density or was this
related to the archetypical concept at all?
Ra: I am Ra. The choice of form is prior to the formation of the
archetypical mind. As the Logos creates Its plan for evolution, then the
chosen form is invested.
Questioner: Was there a reason for choosing the forms that have evolved on
this planet and, if so, what was it?
Ra: I am Ra. We are not entirely sure why our Logos and several
neighboring Logoi of approximately the same space/time of flowering chose
the bipedal, erect form of the second-density apes to invest. It has been our
supposition, which we share with you as long as you are aware that this is
mere opinion, that our Logos was interested in, shall we say, further
                                      122
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

intensifying the veiling process by offering to the third-density form the
near complete probability for the development of speech taking complete
precedence over concept communication or telepathy. We also have the
supposition that the so-called opposable thumb was looked upon as an
excellent means of intensifying the veiling process so that rather than
rediscovering the powers of the mind the third-density entity would, by the
form of its physical manifestation, be drawn to the making, holding, and
using of physical tools.
Questioner: I will guess that the system of archetypes then was devised to
further extend these particular principles. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The phrasing is faulty. However, it is correct that the images
of the archetypical mind are the children of the third-density physical
manifestations of form of the Logos which has created the particular
evolutionary opportunity.
Questioner: Now, as I understand it the archetypes are the biases of a very
fundamental nature that, under free will, generate the experiences of each
entity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The archetypical mind is part of that mind which informs all
experience. Please recall the definition of the archetypical mind as the
repository of those refinements to the cosmic or all-mind made by this
particular Logos and peculiar only to this Logos. Thus it may be seen as one
of the roots of mind, not the deepest but certainly the most informative in
some ways. The other root of mind to be recalled is that racial or planetary
mind which also informs the conceptualizations of each entity to some
degree.
Questioner: At what point in the evolutionary process does the archetypical
mind first have effect upon the entity?
Ra: I am Ra. At the point at which an entity, either by accident or design,
reflects an archetype, the archetypical mind resonates. Thusly random
activation of the archetypical resonances begins almost immediately in
third-density experience. The disciplined use of this tool of evolution comes
far later in this process.
Questioner: What was the ultimate objective of this Logos in designing the
archetypical mind as It did?
Ra: I am Ra. Each Logos desires to create a more eloquent expression of
experience of the Creator by the Creator. The archetypical mind is intended
to heighten this ability to express the Creator in patterns more like the


                                     123
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

fanned peacock’s tail, each facet of the Creator vivid, upright, and shining
with articulated beauty.
Questioner: Is Ra familiar with the archetypical mind of some other Logos
that is not the same as the one we experience?
Ra: I am Ra. There are entities of Ra which have served as far Wanderers to
those of another Logos. The experience has been one which staggers the
intellectual and intuitive capacities, for each Logos sets up an experiment
enough at variance from all others that the subtleties of the archetypical
mind of another Logos are most murky to the resonating mind, body, and
spirit complexes of this Logos.
Questioner: There seems to have been created by this Logos, to me anyway,
a large percentage of entities whose distortion was towards warfare. There
have been the Maldek and Mars experiences and now Earth. It seems that
Venus was the exception to what we could almost call the rule of warfare. Is
this correct and was this envisioned and planned into the construction of
the archetypical mind, possibly not with respect to warfare as we have
experienced it but as to the extreme action of polarization in consciousness?
Ra: I am Ra. It is correct that the Logos designed Its experiment to attempt
to achieve the greatest possible opportunities for polarization in third
density. It is incorrect that warfare of the types specific to your experiences
was planned by the Logos. This form of expression of hostility is an
interesting result which is apparently concomitant with the tool-making
ability. The choice of the Logos to use the life-form with the grasping
thumb is the decision to which this type of warfare may be traced.
Questioner: Then did our Logos hope to see generated a positive and
negative harvest from each density up to the sixth, starting with the third, as
being the most efficient form of generating experience known to It at the
time of Its construction of this system of evolution?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then built into the basis for the archetypes is possibly the
mechanism for creating the polarization in consciousness for service to
others and service to self. Is this, in fact, true?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes. You will notice the many inborn biases which hint to the
possibility of one path’s being more efficient than the other. This was the
design of the Logos.
Questioner: Then what you are saying is that once the path is recognized,
either the positive or the negative polarized entity can find hints along his
path as to the efficiency of that path. Is this correct?
                                      124
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

Ra: I am Ra. That which you say is correct upon its own merits, but is not a
repetition of our statement. Our suggestion was that within the experiential
nexus of each entity within its second-density environment and within the
roots of mind there were placed biases indicating to the watchful eye the
more efficient of the two paths. Let us say, for want of a more precise
adjective, that this Logos has a bias towards kindness.
Questioner: Then you say that the more efficient of the two paths was
suggested in a subliminal way to second density to be the service-to-others
path. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We did not state which was the more efficient path. However,
you are correct in your assumption, as you are aware from having examined
each path in some detail in previous querying.
Questioner: Could this be the reason for the greater positive harvest? I
suspect that it isn’t, but would there be Logoi that have greater negative
percentage harvests because of this type of biasing?
Ra: I am Ra. No. There have been Logoi with greater percentages of
negative harvests. However, the biasing mechanisms cannot change the
requirements for achieving harvestability either in the positive or in the
negative sense. There are Logoi which have offered a neutral background
against which to polarize. This Logos chose not to do so but instead to
allow more of the love and light of the infinite Creator to be both inwardly
and outwardly visible and available to the sensations and conceptualizations
of mind/body/spirit complexes undergoing Its care in experimenting.
Questioner: Were there any other circumstances, biases, consequences, or
plans set up by the Logos other than those we have discussed for the
evolution of Its parts through the densities?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: What were these?
Ra: I am Ra. One more; that is, the permeability of the densities so that
there may be communication from density to density and from plane to
plane or sub-density to sub-density.
Questioner: Then as I see the plan for the evolution by this Logos it was
planned to create as vivid an experience as possible but also one which was
somewhat informed with respect to the infinite Creator and able to
accelerate the progress as a function of will because of the permeability of
densities. Have I covered accurately the general plan of this Logos with
respect to Its evolution?

                                     125
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

Ra: I am Ra. Excepting the actions of the unmanifested self and the actions
of self with other-self, you have been reasonably thorough.
Questioner: Then, is the major mechanism forming the ways and very
essence of the experience that we presently experience here the archetypical
mind and the archetypes?
Ra: I am Ra. These resources are a part of that which you refer to.
Questioner: What I am really asking is what percentage of a part, roughly,
are these responsible for?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask once again that you consider that the archetypical
mind is a part of the deep mind. There are several portions to this mind.
The mind may serve as a resource. To call the archetypical mind the
foundation of experience is to oversimplify the activities of the
mind/body/spirit complex. To work with your query as to percentages is,
therefore, enough misleading in any form of direct answer that we would
ask that you requestion.
Questioner: That’s OK. I don’t think that was too good a question anyway.
When Ra initially planned for helping the Egyptians with their evolution,
what was the primary concept, and also secondary and tertiary if you can
name those, that Ra wished to impart to the Egyptians? In other words,
what was Ra’s training plan or schedule for making the Egyptians aware of
what was necessary for their evolution?
Ra: I am Ra. We came to your peoples to enunciate the Law of One. We
wished to impress upon those who wished to learn of unity that in unity all
paradoxes are resolved; all that is broken is healed; all that is forgotten is
brought to light. We had no teaching plan, as you have called it, in that our
intention when we walked among your peoples was to manifest that which
was requested by those learn/teachers to which we had come.
We are aware that this particular line of querying; that is, the nature and
architecture of the archetypical mind, has caused the questioner to attempt,
to its own mind unsuccessfully, to determine the relative importance of
these concepts. We cannot learn/teach for any, nor would we take this
opportunity from the questioner. However, we shall comment.
The adept has already worked much, not only within the red, orange,
yellow, and green energy centers but also in the opening of blue and indigo.
Up through this point the archetypes function as the great base or plinth of
a builded structure or statue keeping the mind complex viable, level, and
available as a resource whenever it may be evoked. There is a point at which

                                     126
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 90

the adept takes up its work. This is the point at which a clear and conscious
consideration of the archetypical mind is useful.
Questioner: I have an observation on Archetype Number One made by
(name) and I request comment on it by Ra. I will read it, “The Matrix of
the Mind is the conscious mind and is sustained by the power of the spirit
as symbolized by the star which flows to it through the subconscious mind.
It contains the will which is signified by the scepter of power in the
Magician’s hand. All of creation is made through the power of the will
directed by the conscious mind of the Magician, and the bird in the cage
represents the illusion in which the self seems trapped. The Magician
represents maleness or the radiance of being manifested as the creation
through which each entity moves.”
Ra: I am Ra. As this instrument is becoming somewhat weary we shall not
begin this considerable discussion. We would request that this series of
observations be repeated at the outset of the next working. We would
suggest that each concept be discussed separately or, if appropriate, a pair of
concepts be related one to the other within the concept complex. This is
slow work but shall make the eventual building of the concept complexes
more smoothly accomplished.
Were we to have answered the observations as read by you at this
space/time, as much space/time would have been given to the untangling of
various concepts as to the building up of what were very thoughtful
perceptions.
May we ask if there are any brief queries at this time?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. It is well that the appliances for the arms were placed upon the
instrument. We ask that continued vigilance be accorded these distortions
which are, if anything, more distorted towards disease than at our previous
cautionary statement.
All is well, my friends, You are conscientious and faithful in your
alignments. We appreciate your fastidiousness.
I am Ra. I leave you now, rejoicing merrily in the love and the light of the
one infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace
of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      127
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91
                                June 26, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: I have listed the different minds and would like to know if they
are applied in this particular aspect: first, we have the cosmic mind which is,
I would think, the same for all sub-Logoi like our sun. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: A sub-Logos such as our sun, then, in creating Its own
particular evolutionary experience, refines the cosmic mind or, shall we say,
articulates it by Its own additional bias or biases. Is this the correct
observation?
Ra: I am Ra. It is a correct observation with the one exception that concerns
the use of the term “addition” which suggests the concept of that which is
more than the all-mind. Instead, the archetypical mind is a refinement of
the all-mind in a pattern peculiar to the sub-Logo’s choosing.
Questioner: Then the very next refinement that occurs as the cosmic mind
is refined is what we call the archetypical mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Then this creates, I would assume, the planetary or racial
mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: What is the origin of the planetary or racial mind?
Ra: I am Ra. This racial or planetary mind is, for this Logos, a repository of
biases remembered by the mind/body/spirit complexes which have enjoyed
the experience of this planetary influence.
Questioner: Now, some entities on this planet evolved from second density
into third and some were transferred from other planets to recycle in third
density here. Did the ones who were transferred here to recycle in third
density add to the planetary or racial mind?



                                      128
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Ra: I am Ra. Not only did each race add to the planetary mind but also
each race possesses a racial mind. Thus we made this distinction in
discussing this portion of mind. This portion of mind is formed in the series
of seemingly non-simultaneous experiences which are chosen in freedom of
will by the mind/body/spirit complexes of the planetary influence.
Therefore, although this Akashic, planetary, or racial mind is indeed a root
of mind it may be seen in sharp differentiation from the deeper roots of
mind which are not a function of altering memory, if you will.
We must ask your patience at this time. This channel has become somewhat
unclear due to the movement of the cover which touches this instrument.
We ask that the opening sentences be repeated and the breath expelled.
(The microphones attached to the cover upon the instrument were pulled slightly
as a rug was being placed over a noisy tape recorder. The Circle of One was
walked; breath was expelled two feet above the instrument’s head from her right
to her left; and the Circle of One was walked again as requested.)
Ra: I am Ra. We communicate now.
Questioner: Were we successful in re-establishing clear contact?
Ra: I am Ra. There was the misstep which then needed to be re-repeated.
This was done. The communication is once again clear. We enjoyed the
humorous aspects of the necessary repetitions.
Questioner: What occurred when the microphone cords were slightly
moved?
Ra: I am Ra. The link between the instrument’s mind/body/spirit complex
and its yellow-ray, chemical, physical vehicle was jarred. This caused some
maladjustment of the organ you call the lungs and, if the repair had not
been done, would have resulted in a distorted physical complex condition of
this portion of the instrument’s physical vehicle.
Questioner: What kind of distortion?
Ra: I am Ra. The degree of distortion would depend upon the amount of
neglect. The ultimate penalty, shall we say, for the disturbing of the physical
vehicle is the death, in this case by what you would call the congestive heart
failure. As the support group was prompt there should be little or no
distortion experienced by the instrument.
Questioner: Why does such a very minor effect like the slight movement of
the microphone cord result in this situation, not mechanically or
chemically, but philosophically, if you can answer this question?


                                      129
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Ra: I am Ra. We can only answer mechanically as there is no philosophy to
the reflexes of physical vehicular function.
There is what you might call the silver cord reflex; that is, when the
mind/body/spirit complex dwells without the environs of the physical shell
and the physical shell is disturbed, the physical shell will reflexively call back
the absent enlivener; that is, the mind/body/spirit complex which is
connected with what may be metaphysically seen as what some of your
philosophers have called the silver cord. If this is done suddenly the
mind/body/spirit complex will attempt entry into the energy web of the
physical vehicle without due care and the effect is as if one were to stretch
one of your elastic bands and let it shrink rapidly. The resulting snap would
strike hard at the anchored portion of the elastic band.
The process through which you as a group go in recalling this instrument
could be likened unto taking this elastic and gently lessening its degree of
tension until it was without perceptible stretch.
Questioner: To get back to what we were talking about, would the different
races of this planet be from different planets in our local vicinity or the
planets of nearby Logoi which have evolved through their second-density
experiences, and would they create the large number of different races that
we experience on this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. There are correctnesses to your supposition. However, not all
races and sub-races are of various planetary origins. We suggest that in
looking at planetary origins one observes not the pigmentation of the
integument but the biases concerning interactions with other-selves and
definitions regarding the nature of the self.
Questioner: How many different planets have supplied the individuals
which now inhabit this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. This is perceived by us to be unimportant information, but
harmless. There are three major planetary influences upon your planetary
sphere, besides those of your own second-density derivation, and thirteen
minor planetary groups in addition to the above.
Questioner: Thank you. One more question before we start on the specific
questions in regard to archetypes. Do all Logoi evolving after the veil have
twenty-two archetypes?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Is it common for Logoi to have twenty-two archetypes or is
this relatively unique to our Logos?

                                       130
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Ra: I am Ra. The system of sevens is the most articulated system yet
discovered by any experiment by any Logos in our octave.
Questioner: What is the largest number of archetypes, to Ra’s knowledge,
used by a Logos?
Ra: I am Ra. The sevens plus The Choice is the greatest number which has
been used, by our knowledge, by Logoi. It is the result of many, many
previous experiments in articulation of the one Creator.
Questioner: I assume, then, that twenty-two is the greatest number of
archetypes. I also ask is it the minimum number presently in use by any
Logos to Ra’s knowledge?
Ra: I am Ra. The fewest are the two systems of five which are completing
the cycles or densities of experience.
You must grasp the idea that the archetypes were not developed at once but
step by step, and not in order as you know the order at this space/time but
in various orders. Therefore, the two systems of fives were using two
separate ways of viewing the archetypical nature of all experience. Each, of
course, used the Matrix, the Potentiator, and the Significator for this is the
harvest with which our creation began.
One way or system of experimentation had added to these the Catalyst and
the Experience. Another system if you will, had added Catalyst and
Transformation. In one case the methods whereby experience was processed
was further aided but the fruits of experience less aided. In the second case
the opposite may be seen to be the case.
Questioner: Thank you. We have some observations on the archetypes
which are as follows. First, the Matrix of the Mind is depicted in the
Egyptian tarot by a male and this we take as creative energy intelligently
directed. Will Ra comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. This is an extremely thoughtful perception seeing as it does
the male not specifically as biological male but as a male principle. You will
note that there are very definite sexual biases in the images. They are
intended to function both as information as to which biological entity or
energy will attract which archetype and also as a more general view which
sees polarity as a key to the archetypical mind of third density.
Questioner: The second observation is that we have a wand which has been
seen as the power of the will. Will Ra comment?
Ra: I am Ra. The concept of will is indeed pouring forth from each facet of
the image of the Matrix of the Mind. The wand as the will, however, is,

                                      131
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

shall we say, an astrological derivative of the out-reaching hand forming the,
shall we say, magical gesture. The excellent portion of the image which may
be seen distinctly as separate from the concept of the wand is that sphere
which indicates the spiritual nature of the object of the will of one wishing
to do magical acts within the manifestation of your density.
Questioner: The hand downward has been seen as seeking from within and
not from without and the active dominance over the material world. Would
Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Look again, O student. Does the hand reach within? Nay.
Without potentiation the conscious mind has no inwardness. That hand, O
student, reaches towards that which, outside its unpotentiated influence, is
locked from it.
Questioner: The square cage represents the material illusion and is an
unmagical shape. Can Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The square, wherever seen, is the symbol of the third-density
illusion and may be seen either as unmagical or, in the proper
configuration, as having been manifested within; that is, the material world
given life.
Questioner: The dark area around the square, then, would be the darkness
of the subconscious mind. Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no further thing to say to the perceptive student.
Questioner: The checkered portion would represent polarity?
Ra: I am Ra. This also is satisfactory.
Questioner: The bird is a messenger which the hand is reaching down to
unlock. Can Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The winged visions or images in this system are to be noted
not so much for their distinct kind as for the position of the wings. All birds
are indeed intended to suggest that just as the Matrix figure, the Magician,
cannot act without reaching its winged spirit, so neither can the spirit fly
lest it be released into conscious manifestation and fructified thereby.
Questioner: The star would represent the potentiating forces of the
subconscious mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This particular part of this image is best seen in astrological
terms. We would comment at this space/time that Ra did not include the
astrological portions of these images in the system of images designed to
evoke the archetypical leitmotifs.

                                      132
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Questioner: Are there any other additions to Card Number One other than
the star that are of other than the basic archetypical aspects?
Ra: I am Ra. There are details of each image seen through the cultural eye
of the time of inscription. This is to be expected. Therefore, when viewing
the, shall we say, Egyptian costumes and systems of mythology used in the
images it is far better to penetrate to the heart of the costumes’ significance
or the creatures’ significance rather than clinging to a culture which is not
your own.
In each entity the image will resonate slightly differently. Therefore, there is
the desire upon Ra’s part to allow for the creative envisioning of each
archetype using general guidelines rather than specific and limiting
definitions.
Questioner: The cup represents a mixture of positive and negative passions.
Could Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The otic portions of this instrument’s physical vehicle did not
perceive a significant portion of your query. Please requery.
Questioner: There is apparently a cup which we have as containing a
mixture of positive and negative influences. However, I personally doubt
this. Could Ra comment on this, please?
Ra: I am Ra. Doubt not the polarity, O student, but release the cup from its
stricture. It is indeed a distortion of the original image.
Questioner: What was the original image?
Ra: I am Ra. The original image had the checkering as the suggestion of
polarity.
Questioner: Then was this a representation of the waiting polarity to be
tasted by the Matrix of the Mind?
Ra: I am Ra. This is exquisitely perceptive.
Questioner: I have listed here the sword as representing struggle. I am not
sure that I even can call anything in this diagram a sword. Would Ra
comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Doubt not the struggle, O student, but release the sword from
its stricture. Observe the struggle of a caged bird to fly.
Questioner: I have listed the coin represents work accomplished. I am also
in doubt about the existence of the coin in this diagram. Could Ra
comment on that please?

                                      133
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Ra: I am Ra. Again, doubt not that which the coin is called to represent, for
does not the Magus strive to achieve through the manifested world? Yet
release the coin from its stricture.
Questioner: And finally, the Magician represents the conscious mind. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask the student to consider the concept of the unfed
conscious mind, the mind without any resource but consciousness. Do not
confuse the unfed conscious mind with that mass of complexities which you
as students experience, as you have so many, many times dipped already
into the processes of potentiation, catalyst, experience, and transformation.
Questioner: Are these all of the components, then, of this first archetype?
Ra: I am Ra. These are all you, the student, see. Thusly the complement is
complete for you. Each student may see some other nuance. We, as we have
said, did not offer these images with boundaries but only as guidelines
intending to aid the adept and to establish the architecture of the deep, or
archetypical, portion of the deep mind.
Questioner: How is the knowledge of the facets of the archetypical mind
used by the individual to accelerate his evolution?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall offer an example based upon this first explored
archetype or concept complex. The conscious mind of the adept may be full
to bursting of the most abstruse and unimaginable of ideas, so that further
ideation becomes impossible and work in blue ray or indigo is blocked
through over-activation. It is then that the adept would call upon the new
mind, untouched and virgin, and dwell within the archetype of the new and
unblemished mind without bias, without polarity, full of the magic of the
Logos.
Questioner: Then you are saying, if I am correct in understanding what you
have just said, that the conscious mind may be filled with an almost infinite
number of concepts but there is a set of basic concepts which are what I
would call important simply because they are the foundations for the
evolution of consciousness, and will, if carefully applied, accelerate the
evolution of consciousness, whereas the vast array of concepts, ideas, and
experiences that we meet in our daily lives may have little or no bearing
upon the evolution of consciousness except in a very indirect way. In other
words, what we are attempting to do here is find the motivators of
evolution and utilize them to move through our evolutionary track. Is this
correct?


                                     134
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 91

Ra: I am Ra. Not entirely. The archetypes are not the foundation for
spiritual evolution but rather are the tool for grasping in an undistorted
manner the nature of this evolution.
Questioner: So for an individual who wished to consciously augment his
own evolution, an ability to recognize and utilize the archetypes would be
beneficial in sorting out that which he wishes to seek from that which
would be not as efficient a seeking tool. Would this be a good statement?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a fairly adequate statement. The term “efficient” might
also fruitfully be replaced by the term “undistorted.” The archetypical
mind, when penetrated lucidly, is a blueprint of the builded structure of all
energy expenditures and all seeking without distortion. This, as a resource
within the deep mind, is of great potential aid to the adept.
We would ask for one more query at this space/time as this instrument is
experiencing continuous surges of the distortion you call pain and we wish
to take our leave of the working while the instrument still possesses a
sufficient amount of transferred energy to ease the transition to the waking
state, if you would call it that.
Questioner: Since we are at the end of the Matrix of the Mind I will just
ask if there is anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Each is most conscientious. The instrument might be
somewhat more comfortable with the addition of the swirling of the waters
with spine erect. All other things which can be performed for the
instrument’s benefit are most diligently done. We commend the continual
fidelity of the group to the ideals of harmony and thanksgiving. This shall
be your great protection. All is well, my friends. The appurtenances and
alignments are excellent.
I am Ra. I leave you glorying in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      135
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92
                               July 8, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The condition of this instrument is slightly more distorted
towards weakness in each respect since the previous asking.
Questioner: Is there a specific cause for this and could you tell us what it is?
Ra: I am Ra. The effective cause of the increased physical distortions has to
do with the press of continuing substantial levels of the distortion you call
pain. Various vehicular distortions other than the specifically arthritic have
been accentuated by psychic greeting and the combined effect has been
deleterious.
The continued slight but noticeable loss of the vital energies is due to the
necessity for the instrument to call upon this resource in order to clear the,
shall we say, way for a carefully purified service-to-others working. The use
of the will in the absence of physical and, in this particular case, mental and
mental/emotional energies requires vital energies.
Questioner: We have been trying to figure out how to provide the
instrument with the swirling waters, and we hope to do that soon. Is there
any other thing that we can do to improve this situation?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue in peace and harmony. Already the support group
does much. There is the need for the instrument to choose the manner of its
being-ness. It has the distortion, as we have noted, towards the martyrdom.
This can be evaluated and choices made only by the entity.
Questioner: What is the present situation with the negative fifth-density
visitor?
Ra: I am Ra. It is with this group.
Questioner: What prompted it to return?
Ra: I am Ra. The promptings were duple. There was the recovery of much
negative polarity upon the part of your friend of fifth density and at the
same approximate nexus a temporary lessening of the positive harmony of
this group.



                                      136
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

Questioner: Is there anything that we can do about the instrument’s
stomach problem or constipation?
Ra: I am Ra. The healing modes of which each is capable are already in use.
Questioner: In the last session we discussed the first tarot card of the
Egyptian type. Are there any distortions in the cards that we have that Ra
did not originally intend or any additions that Ra did intend in this
particular tarot?
Ra: The distortions remaining after the removal of astrological material are
those having to do with the mythos of the culture to which Ra offered this
teach/learning tool. This is why we have suggested approaching the images
looking for the heart of the image rather than being involved overmuch by
the costumes and creatures of a culture not familiar to your present
incarnation. We have no wish to add to an already distorted group of
images, feeling that although distortion is inevitable there is the least
amount which can be procured in the present arrangement.
Questioner: Then you are saying that the cards that we have here are the
best available cards.
Ra: I am Ra. Your statement is correct in that we consider the so-called
Egyptian tarot the most undistorted version of the images which Ra offered.
This is not to intimate that other systems may not, in their own way, form
an helpful architecture for the adept’s consideration of the archetypical
mind.
Questioner: I would like to make an analogy of when a baby is first born. I
am assuming that the Matrix of the Mind is new and undistorted and veiled
from the Potentiator of the Mind and ready for that which it is to
experience in the incarnation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: I will read several statements and ask for Ra’s comments. The
first is: Until an entity becomes consciously aware of the evolutionary
process the Logos or intelligent energy creates the potentials for an entity to
gain the experience necessary for polarization. Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. This is so.
Questioner: Then, this occurs because the Potentiator of the Mind is
directly connected, through the roots of the tree of mind, to the
archetypical mind and to the Logos which created it and because of the veil
between the Matrix and Potentiator of the Mind allows for the
development of the will. Will Ra comment on that?

                                      137
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

Ra: I am Ra. Some untangling may be needed. As the mind/body/spirit
complex which has not yet reached the point of the conscious awareness of
the process of evolution prepares for incarnation it has programmed for it a
less than complete, that is to say a partially randomized, system of learnings.
The amount of randomness of potential catalyst is proportional to the
newness of the mind/body/spirit complex to third density. This, then,
becomes a portion of that which you may call a potential for incarnational
experience. This is indeed carried within that portion of the mind which is
of the deep mind, the architecture of which may be envisioned as being
represented by that concept complex known as the Potentiator.
It is not in the archetypical mind of an entity that the potential for
incarnational experience resides but in the mind/body/spirit complex’s
insertion, shall we say, into the energy web of the physical vehicle and the
chosen planetary environment. However, to more deeply articulate this
portion of the mind/body/spirit complex’s being-ness this archetype, the
Potentiator of the Mind, may be evoked with profit to the student of its
own evolution.
Questioner: Then are you saying that the source of preincarnatively
programmed catalyst is the Potentiator of the Mind?
Ra: I am Ra. No. We are suggesting that the Potentiator of the Mind is an
archetype which may aid the adept in grasping the nature of this
preincarnative and continuingly incarnative series of choices.
Questioner: The third statement: Just as free will taps intelligent infinity
which yields intelligent energy which then focuses and creates the densities
of this octave of experience, the Potentiator of the Mind utilizes its
connection with intelligent energy and taps or potentiates the Matrix of the
Mind which yields the Catalyst of the Mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is thoughtful but confused. The Matrix of the Mind is
that which reaches just as the kinetic phase of intelligent infinity, through
free will, reaches for the Logos or, in the case of the mind/body/spirit
complex the sub-sub-Logos which is the free will potentiated being-ness of
the mind/body/spirit complex; to intelligent infinity, Love, and all that
follows from that Logos; to the Matrix or, shall we say, the conscious,
waiting self of each entity, the Love or the sub-sub-Logos spinning through
free will all those things which may enrich the experience of the Creator by
the Creator.
It is indeed so that the biases of the potentials of a mind/body/spirit
complex cause the catalyst of this entity to be unique and to form a


                                      138
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

coherent pattern that resembles the dance, full of movement, forming a
many-figured tapestry of motion.
Questioner: The fourth statement: When the Catalyst of the Mind is
processed by the entity the Experience of the Mind results. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. There are subtle misdirections in this simple statement having
to do with the overriding qualities of the Significator. It is so that catalyst
yields experience. However, through free will and the faculty of imperfect
memory catalyst is most often only partially used and the experience thus
correspondingly skewed.
Questioner: Then, the dynamic process between the Matrix, Potentiator,
Catalyst, and Experience of the Mind forms the nature of the mind or the
Significator of the Mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. As our previous response suggests, the Significator of the Mind
is both actor and acted upon. With this exception the statement is largely
correct.
Questioner: As the entity becomes consciously aware of this process it
programs this activity itself before the incarnation. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Please keep in mind that we are discussing, not
the archetypical mind, which is a resource available equally to each but
unevenly used, but that to which it speaks: the incarnational experiential
process of each mind/body/spirit complex. We wish to make this distinction
clear for it is not the archetypes which live the incarnation but the conscious
mind/body/spirit complex which may indeed live the incarnation without
recourse to the quest for articulation of the processes of potentiation,
experience, and transformation.
Questioner: Thank you. And finally, as each energy center becomes
activated and balanced, the Transformation of the Mind is called upon
more and more frequently. When all of the energy centers are activated and
balanced to a minimal degree, contact with intelligent infinity occurs; the
veil is removed; and the Great Way of the Mind is called upon. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No. This is a quite eloquent look at some relationships within
the archetypical mind. However, it must be seen once again that the
archetypical mind does not equal the acting incarnational mind/body/spirit
complex’s progression or evolution.
Due to the first misperception we hesitate to speak to the second
consideration but shall attempt clarity. While studying the archetypical
mind we may suggest that the student look at the Great Way of the Mind,
                                      139
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

not as that which is attained after contact with intelligent infinity, but
rather as that portion of the archetypical mind which denotes and
configures the particular framework within which the Mind, the Body, or
the Spirit archetypes move.
Questioner: Turning, then, to my analogy or example of the newborn
infant and its undistorted Matrix of the Mind, this newborn infant has its
subconscious mind veiled from the Matrix of the Mind. The second
archetype, the Potentiator of the Mind, is going to act at some time through
the veil—though I hesitate to say through the veil since I don’t think that is
a very good way of stating it—but the Potentiator of the Mind will act to
create a condition such as the example I mentioned of the infant touching a
hot object. The hot object we could take as random catalyst. The infant can
either leave its hand on the hot object or rapidly remove it. My question is,
is the Potentiator of the Mind involved at all in this experience and, if so,
how?
Ra: I am Ra. The Potentiator of Mind and of Body are both involved in the
questing of the infant for new experience. The mind/body/spirit complex
which is an infant has one highly developed portion which may be best
studied by viewing the Significators of Mind and Body. You notice we do
not include the spirit. That portion of a mind/body/spirit complex is not
reliably developed in each and every mind/body/spirit complex. Thusly the
infant’s significant self, which is the harvest of biases of all previous
incarnational experiences, offers to this infant biases with which to meet
new experience.
However, the portion of the infant which may be articulated by the Matrix
of the Mind is indeed unfed by experience and has the bias of reaching for
this experience through free will just as intelligent energy in the kinetic
phase, through free will, creates the Logos. These sub-sub-Logoi, then, or
those portions of the mind/body/spirit complex which may be articulated
by consideration of the Potentiators of Mind and Body, through free will,
choose to make alterations in their experiential continuum. The results of
these experiments in novelty are then recorded in the portion of the mind
and body articulated by the Matrices thereof.
Questioner: Are all activities that the entity has from the state of infancy a
function of the Potentiator of the Mind?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, although the functions of the mind are indeed
paramount over those of the body, the body being the creature of the mind,
certainly not all actions of a mind/body/spirit complex could be seen to be
due to the potentiating qualities of the mind complex alone as the body and
in some cases the spirit also potentiates action. Secondly, as a
                                      140
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

mind/body/spirit complex becomes aware of the process of spiritual
evolution, more and more of the activities of the mind and body which
precipitate activity are caused by those portions of the mind/body/spirit
complex which are articulated by the archetypes of Transformation.
Questioner: The Matrix of the Mind is depicted as a male on the card and
the Potentiator as female. Could Ra state why this is and how this affects
these two archetypes?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, as we have said, the Matrix of the Mind is attracted to
the biological male and the Potentiator of the Mind to the biological
female. Thusly in energy transfer the female is able to potentiate that which
may be within the conscious mind of the male so that it may feel enspirited.
In a more general sense, that which reaches may be seen as a male principle.
That which awaits the reaching may be seen as a female principle. The
richness of the male and female system of polarity is interesting and we
would not comment further but suggest consideration by the student.
Questioner: In Card #2, the Potentiator of the Mind, we see a female seated
on a rectangular block. She is veiled and sitting between two pillars which
seem to be identically covered with drawings but one is much darker than
the other. I am assuming that the veil represents the veil between the
conscious and subconscious or Matrix and Potentiator of the Mind. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct.
Questioner: I am assuming that she sits between the different colored
columns, with the dark one on her left, to indicate at this position an equal
opportunity for the potentiation of the mind to be of the negative or
positive nature. Would Ra comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. Although this is correct it is not as perceptive as the notice that
the Priestess, as this figure has been called, sits within a structure in which
polarity, symbolized as you correctly noted by the light and dark pillars, is
an integral and necessary part. The unfed mind has no polarity just as
intelligent infinity has none. The nature of the sub-sub-sub-Logos which
offers the third-density experience is one of polarity, not by choice but by
careful design.
We perceive an unclear statement. The polarity of Potentiator is there not
for the Matrix to choose. It is there for the Matrix to accept as given.
Questioner: In other words, this particular illusion has polarity as its
foundation which might be represented by the structural significance of
these columns. Is this correct?
                                      141
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: It seems to me that the drawings on each of these columns are
identical but that the left-hand column, that is the one on the Priestess’s
left, has been shaded much darker indicating that the events and the
experiences may be identical in the incarnation but may be approached,
viewed, and utilized with either polarity. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You will note also, from the symbol denoting
spirit in manifestation upon each pillar, that the one infinite Creator is no
respecter of polarity but offers Itself in full to all.
Questioner: There seems to be a book on the Priestess’s lap which is half
hidden by a robe or material that covers her right shoulder. It would seem
that this indicates that knowledge is available if the veil is lifted but is not
only hidden by the veil but is hidden partially by her very garment which
she must somehow remove to become aware of the knowledge which she
has available. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In that the conceit of the volume was not originated by Ra we
ask that you release the volume from its strictured form. Your perceptions
are quite correct.
The very nature of the feminine principle of mind which, in Ra’s
suggestion, was related specifically to what may be termed sanctified
sexuality is, itself, without addition, the book which neither the feminine
nor the male principle may use until the male principle has reached and
penetrated, in a symbolically sexual fashion, the inner secrets of this
feminine principle.
All robes, in this case indicating the outer garments of custom, shield these
principles. Thusly there is great dynamic tension, if you will, betwixt the
Matrix and the Potentiator of the Mind.
Questioner: Are there any other parts of this picture that were not given by
Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. The astrological symbols offered are not given by Ra.
Questioner: The fact that the Priestess sits atop the rectangular block
indicates to me that the Potentiator of the Mind has dominance or is above
the material illusion. Is this in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us say, rather, that this figure is immanent, near at hand,
shall we say, within all manifestation. The opportunities for the reaching to
the Potentiator are numerous. However, of itself the Potentiator does not
enter manifestation.

                                       142
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

Questioner: Would the half moon on the crown represent the receptivity of
the subconscious mind?
Ra: I am Ra. This symbol is not given by Ra but it is not distasteful for
within your own culture the moon represents the feminine, the sun the
masculine. Thusly we accept this portion as a portion of the image, for it
seems without significant distortion.
Questioner: Was the symbol on the front of the Priestess’s shirt given by
Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. The crux ansata is the correct symbol. The addition and slight
distortion of this symbol thereby is astrological and may be released from its
stricture.
Questioner: Would this crux ansata then be indicating the sign of life as the
spirit enlivening matter?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite correct. Moreover, it illuminates a concept which
is a portion of the archetype which has to do with the continuation of the
consciousness which is being potentiated, in incarnation, beyond
incarnation.
Questioner: Were the grapes depicted on the cloth over her shoulder of
Ra’s communication?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: We have those as indicating the fertility of the subconscious
mind. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, O student, but note ye the function of the
mantle. There is great protection given by the very character of
potentiation. To bear fruit is a protected activity.
Questioner: The protection here seems to be depicted as being on the right-
hand side but not the left. Would this indicate that there is protection for
the positive path but not for the negative?
Ra: I am Ra. You perceive correctly an inborn bias offering to the seeing eye
and listing ear information concerning the choice of the more efficient
polarity. We would at this time, as you may call it, suggest one more full
query.
Questioner: I will attempt an example of the Potentiator of the Mind
acting. As the infant gains time in incarnation would it experience the
Potentiator offering both positive and negative potential thoughts, shall I
say, for the Matrix to experience which then begin to accumulate in the

                                     143
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 92

Matrix and color it one way or the other in polarity depending upon its
continuing choice of that polarity? Is this in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, again may we distinguish between the archetypical
mind and the process of incarnational experience of the mind/body/spirit
complex.
Secondly, each potentiation which has been reached for by the Matrix is
recorded by the Matrix but experienced by the Significator. The experience
of the Significator of this potentiated activity is of course dependent upon
the acuity of its processes of Catalyst and Experience.
May we ask if there are briefer queries before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The support group is functioning well. The instrument, itself,
might ponder some earlier words and consider their implications. We say
this because the continued calling upon vital energies, if allowed to proceed
to the end of the vital energy, will end this contact. There is not the need
for continued calling upon these energies. The instrument must find the
key to this riddle or face a growing loss of this particular service at this
particular space/time nexus.
All is well. The alignments are exemplary.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      144
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93
                             August 18, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical complex distortions of this instrument far more
closely approach what you might call the zero mark; that is, the instrument,
while having no native physical energy, is not nearly so far in physical
energy deficit distortions. The vital energy distortions are somewhat
strengthened since the last asking.
Questioner: What is the position and condition of our fifth-density,
negatively oriented visitor?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity is with this group but in a quiescent state due to
some bafflement as to the appropriate method for enlarging upon its chosen
task.
Questioner: Thank you. You have stated previously that the foundation of
our present illusion is the concept of polarity. I would like to ask, since we
have defined the two polarities as service-to-others and service-to-self, is
there a more complete or eloquent or enlightening definition of these
polarities or any more information that we don’t have at this time that you
could give on the two ends of the poles that would give us a better insight
into the nature of polarity itself?
Ra: I am Ra. It is unlikely that there is a more pithy or eloquent description
of the polarities of third density than service-to-others and service-to-self
due to the nature of the mind/body/spirit complexes’ distortions towards
perceiving concepts relating to philosophy in terms of ethics or activity.
However, we might consider the polarities using slightly variant terms. In
this way a possible enrichment of insight might be achieved for some.
One might consider the polarities with the literal nature enjoyed by the
physical polarity of the magnet. The negative and positive, with electrical
characteristics, may be seen to be just as in the physical sense. It is to be
noted in this context that it is quite impossible to judge the polarity of an
act or an entity, just as it is impossible to judge the relative goodness of the
negative and positive poles of the magnet.




                                       145
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

Another method of viewing polarities might involve the concept of
radiation/absorption. That which is positive is radiant; that which is
negative is absorbent.
Questioner: Now, if I understand correctly, prior to the veiling process the
electrical polarities, the polarities of radiation and absorption, all existed in
some part of the creation, but the service-to-others/service-to-self polarity
with which we are familiar had not evolved and only showed up after the
veiling process as an addition to the list of possible polarities in the creation.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: Would you correct me on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The description of polarity as service-to-self and service-to-
others, from the beginning of our creation, dwelt within the architecture of
the primal Logos. Before the veiling process the impact of actions taken by
mind/body/spirits upon their consciousness was not palpable to a significant
enough degree to allow the expression of this polarity to be significantly
useful. Over the period of what you would call time this expression of
polarity did indeed work to alter the biases of mind/body/spirits so that they
might eventually be harvested. The veiling process made the polarity far
more effective.
Questioner: I might make the analogy, then, in that when a polarization in
the atmosphere occurs to create thunderstorms, lightening, and much
activity, this more vivid experience could be likened to the polarization in
consciousness which creates the more vivid experience. Would this be
appropriate as an analogy?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a shallowness to this analogy in that one entity’s
attention might be focused upon a storm for the duration of the storm.
However, the storm producing conditions are not constant whereas the
polarizing conditions are constant. Given this disclaimer, we may agree with
your analogy.
Questioner: With the third tarot card we come to the first addition of
archetypes after the veiling process, as I understand it. I am assuming that
this third archetype is, shall I say, loaded in a way so as to create the possible
polarization since that seems to be one of the primary objectives of this
particular Logos in the evolutionary process. Am I in any way correct on
that?
Ra: I am Ra. Before we reply to your query we ask your patience as we must
needs examine the mind complex of this instrument in order that we might

                                       146
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

attempt to move the left manual appendage of the instrument. If we are not
able to affect some relief from pain we shall take our leave. Please have
patience while we do that which is appropriate.
(Thirty second pause.)
I am Ra. There will continue to be pain flares. However, the critical portion
of the intense pain has been alleviated by repositioning.
Your supposition is correct.
Questioner: There seems to be no large hint of polarity in this drawing
except for the possible coloration of the many cups in the wheel. Part of
them are colored black and part are colored white. Would this indicate that
each experience has within it the possible negative or positive use of that
experience that is randomly generated by this seeming wheel of fortune?
Ra: I am Ra. Your supposition is thoughtful. However, it is based upon an
addition to the concept complex which is astrological in origin. Therefore,
we request that you retain the concept of polarity but release the cups from
their strictured form. The element you deal with is not in motion in its
original form but is indeed the abiding sun which, from the spirit, shines in
protection over all catalyst available from the beginning of complexity to the
discerning mind/body/spirit complex.
Indeed you may, rather, find polarity expressed, firstly, by the many
opportunities offered in the material illusion which is imaged by the not-
white and not-dark square upon which the entity of the image is seated,
secondly, upon the position of that seated entity. It does not meet
opportunity straight on but glances off to one side or another. In the image
you will note a suggestion that the offering of the illusion will often seem to
suggest the opportunities lying upon the left-hand path or, as you might
refer to it more simply, the service-to-self path. This is a portion of the
nature of the Catalyst of the Mind.
Questioner: The feet of the entity seem to be on an unstable platform that
is dark to the rear and light to the front. I am guessing that possibly this
indicates that the entity standing on this could sway in either direction, to
the left or to the right-hand path. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is most perceptive.
Questioner: The bird, I am guessing, might be a messenger of the two paths
depicted by the position of the wings bringing catalyst which could be used
to polarize on either path. Is this in any way correct?



                                      147
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

Ra: I am Ra. It is a correct perception that the position of the winged
creature is significant. The more correct perception of this entity and its
significance is the realization that the mind/body/spirit complex is, having
made contact with its potentiated self, now beginning its flight towards that
great Logos which is that which is sought by the adept.
Further, the nature of the winged creature is echoed both by the female
holding it and the symbol of the female upon which the figure’s feet rest;
that is, the nature of catalyst is overwhelmingly of an unconsciousness,
coming from that which is not of the mind and which has no connection
with the intellect, as you call it, which precedes or is concomitant with
catalytic action. All uses of catalyst by the mind are those consciously
applied to catalyst. Without conscious intent the use of catalyst is never
processed through mediation, ideation, and imagination.
Questioner: I would like, if possible, an example of the activity we call
Catalyst of the Mind in a particular individual undergoing this process.
Could Ra give an example of that?
Ra: I am Ra. All that assaults your senses is catalyst. We, in speaking to this
support group through this instrument, offer catalyst. The configurations of
each in the group of body offer catalyst through comfort/discomfort. In fact
all that is unprocessed that has come before the notice of a mind/body/spirit
complex is catalyst.
Questioner: Then presently we receive catalyst of the mind as we are aware
of Ra’s communication and we receive catalyst of the body as our bodies
sense all of the inputs to them, but could Ra then describe catalyst of the
spirit, and are we at this time receiving that catalyst and if not, could Ra
give an example of that?
Ra: I am Ra. Catalyst being processed by the body is catalyst for the body.
Catalyst being processed by the mind is catalyst for the mind. Catalyst
being processed by the spirit is catalyst for the spirit. An individual
mind/body/spirit complex may use any catalyst which comes before its
notice, be it through the body and its senses or through mediation or
through any other more highly developed source, in its unique way to form
an experience unique to it, with its biases.
Questioner: Would I be correct in saying that the archetype for the Catalyst
of the Mind is the Logos’s model for its most efficient plan for the activity
or use of the catalyst of the mind?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.


                                     148
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

Questioner: Then the adept, in becoming familiar with the Logos’s
archetype in each case, would be able to most efficiently use the Logos’s
plan for evolution. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. In the archetypical mind one has the resource of not
specifically a plan for evolution but rather a blueprint or architecture of the
nature of evolution. This may seem to be a small distinction, but it has
significance in perceiving more clearly the use of this resource of the deep
mind.
Questioner: Then Ra presented the images which we know now as the tarot
so that the Egyptian adepts of the time could accelerate their personal
evolution. Is this correct, and was there any other reason for the
presentation of these images by Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct.
Questioner: Are there any other uses at all of tarot cards other than the one
I just named?
Ra: I am Ra. To the student the tarot images offer a resource for
learn/teaching the processes of evolution. To any other entity these images
are pictures and no more.
Questioner: I was specifically thinking of the fact that Ra, in an earlier
session, spoke of the tarot as a system of divination. Would you tell me
what you meant by that?
Ra: I am Ra. Due to the influence of the Chaldees, the system of
archetypical images was incorporated by the priests of that period into a
system of astrologically based study, learning, and divination. This was not
a purpose for which Ra developed the tarot.
Questioner: The third card also shows the wand, I am assuming it is, in the
right hand. The ball atop the wand is the round magical shape. Am I in any
way correct in guessing that the Catalyst of the Mind suggests the possible
eventual use of the magic depicted by this wand?
Ra: I am Ra. The wand is astrological in its origin and as an image may be
released from its stricture. The sphere of spiritual power is an indication
indeed that each opportunity is pregnant with the most extravagant magical
possibilities for the far-seeing adept.
Questioner: The fact that the clothing of the entity is transparent indicates
the semi-permeability of the veil for the catalytic process. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We again must pause.

                                      149
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

(Fifteen second pause.)
I am Ra. We continue under somewhat less than optimal conditions.
However, due to the nature of this instrument’s opening to us our pathway
is quite clear and we shall continue. Because of pain flares we must ask you
to repeat your last query.
Questioner: I was just wondering if the transparency of the garments on the
third card indicates the semi-permeable nature of the veil between the
conscious and unconscious mind?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a thoughtful perception and cannot be said to be
incorrect. However, the intended suggestion, in general, is an echo of our
earlier suggestion that the nature of catalyst is that of the unconscious; that
is, outward catalyst comes through the veil.
All that you perceive seems to be consciously perceived. This is not the
correct supposition. All that you perceive is perceived as catalyst
unconsciously. By the, shall we say, time that the mind begins its
appreciation of catalyst, that catalyst has been filtered through the veil and
in some cases much is veiled in the most apparently clear perception.
Questioner: I’m at a loss to know the significance of the serpents that adorn
the head of the entity on this drawing. Are they of Ra and, if so, what do
they stand for?
Ra: I am Ra. They are cultural in nature. In the culture to which these
images were given the serpent was the symbol of wisdom. Indeed, to the
general user of these images perhaps the most accurate connotation of this
portion of the concept complexes might be the realization that the serpent is
that which is powerful magically. In the positive sense this means that the
serpent will appear at the indigo-ray site upon the body of the image figures.
When a negative connotation is intended one may find the serpent at the
solar plexus center.
Questioner: Is there any significance to the serpent? Is there any polarity to
the serpent as we experience it in this illusion?
Ra: I am Ra. We assume that you question the serpent as used in these
images rather than the second-density life form which is a portion of your
experience. There is a significance to the serpent form in a culture which
coexists with your own but which is not your own; that is, the serpent is
symbol of that which some call the kundalini and which we have discussed
in previous material.
Questioner: Is there any other aspect of this third card that Ra could
comment on at this time?
                                      150
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 93

Ra: I am Ra. There may be said to be many aspects which another student
might note and ponder in this image. However, it is the nature of
teach/learning to avoid trespass into the realms of learn/teaching for the
student. We are quite agreed to comment upon all observations that the
student may make. We cannot speak further than this for any student.
We would add that it is expected that each student shall naturally have an
unique experience of perception dealing with each image. Therefore, it is
not expected that the questioner ask comprehensively for all students. It is,
rather, expected and accepted that the questioner will ask a moiety of
questions which build up a series of concepts concerning each archetype
which then offer to each succeeding student the opportunity for more
informed study of the archetypical mind.
May we ask for one more query at this time. We are pleased to report that
this instrument has remembered to request the reserving of some transferred
energy to make more comfortable the transition back to the waking state.
Therefore, we find that there is sufficient energy for one more query.
Questioner: I am assuming that you mean one full question. I’ll make that
question in this form. I’d like to know the significance of the shape of the
crux ansata, and if that’s too much of an answer I’ll just ask if there is
anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable or to
improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. There are mathematical ratios within this image which may
yield informative insights to one fond of riddles. We shall not untangle the
riddle. We may indicate that the crux ansata is a part of the concept
complexes of the archetypical mind, the circle indicating the magic of the
spirit, the cross indicating that nature of manifestation which may only be
valued by the losing. Thus the crux ansata is intended to be seen as an
image of the eternal in and through manifestation and beyond
manifestation through the sacrifice and the transformation of that which is
manifest.
The support group functions well. The swirling waters experienced by the
instrument since our previous working have substantially aided the
instrument in its lessening of the distortion of pain.
All is well. The alignments are well guarded.
We leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the Infinite One. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the One Infinite
and Glorious Creator. Adonai.



                                      151
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94
                            August 26, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. There is some small increase in physical energy deficit. It is not
substantial. All else is as at the previous asking.
Questioner: From the previous session the statement was made that much
is veiled to the most apparently clear observation. Would Ra expand on
what was meant by that statement? I assume that this means the veiling of
all that which is outside of the limits of what we call our physical perception
having to do with the spectrum of light, etc., but I also intuit that there is
more than that veiled. Would Ra expand on that concept?
Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive in your supposition. Indeed, we meant not
any suggestions that the physical apparatus of your current illusion was
limited as part of the veiling process. Your physical limits are as they are.
However, because of the unique biases of each mind/body/spirit complex
there are sometimes quite simple instances of distortion when there is no
apparent cause for such distortion. Let us use the example of the virile and
immature male who meets and speaks clearly with a young female whose
physical form has the appropriate configuration to cause, for this male
entity, the activation of the red-ray sexual arousal.
The words spoken may be upon a simple subject such as naming,
information as to the occupation, and various other common interchanges
of sound vibratory complex. The male entity, however, is using almost all
the available consciousness it possesses in registering the desirability of the
female. Such may also be true of the female.
Thusly an entire exchange of information may be meaningless because the
actual catalyst is of the body. This is unconsciously controlled and is not a
conscious decision. This example is simplistic.
Questioner: I have drawn a small diagram in which I simply show an arrow
which represents catalyst penetrating a line at right angles to the arrow,
which is the veil, depositing in one of two repositories which I would call
the right-hand path and the left-hand path, and I have labeled these two
repositories the Experience. Would this be a very rough analogy of the way
the catalyst is filtered through the veil to become experience?

                                      152
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94

Ra: I am Ra. Again, you are partially correct. The deeper biases of a
mind/body/spirit complex pilot the catalyst around the many isles of
positivity and negativity as expressed in the archipelago of the deeper mind.
However, the analogy is incorrect in that it does not take into account the
further polarization which most certainly is available to the conscious mind
after it has perceived the partially polarized catalyst from the deeper mind.
Questioner: It seems to me that the Experience of the Mind would act in
such a way as to change the nature of the veil so that catalyst would be
filtered so as to be acceptable in the bias that is increasingly chosen by the
entity. For instance, if he had chosen the right-hand path the Experience of
the Mind would change the permeability of the veil to accept more and
more positive catalyst. Also the other would be true for accepting more
negative catalyst if the left-hand path were the one that was chosen. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not only correct but there is a further ramification. As
the entity increases in experience it shall, more and more, choose positive
interpretations of catalyst if it is upon the service-to-others path and
negative interpretations of catalyst if its experience has been of the service-
to-self path.
Questioner: Then the mechanism designed by the Logos of the action of
catalyst resulting in experience was planned to be self-accelerating in that it
would create this process of variable permeability. Is this an adequate
statement?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no variable permeability involved in the concepts we
have just discussed. Except for this, you are quite correct.
Questioner: Now I can understand, to use a poor term again, the necessity
for the archetype of Catalyst of the Mind but what is the reason for having a
blueprint or model for the Experience of the Mind other than this simple
model of dual repositories for negative and positive catalyst? It seems to me
that the first distortion of free will would be better served if no model for
experience was made. Could you clear that up for me?
Ra: I am Ra. Your question is certainly interesting and your confusion
hopefully productive. We cannot learn/teach for the student. We shall
simply note, as we have previously, the attraction of various archetypes to
male and to female. We suggest that this line of consideration may prove
productive.
Questioner: In the fourth archetype the card shows a male whose body faces
forward. I assume that this indicates that the Experience of the Mind will
reach for catalyst. However, the face is to the left which indicates to me that
                                      153
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94

in reaching for catalyst, negative catalyst will be more apparent in its power
and effect. Would Ra comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. The archetype of Experience of the Mind reaches not, O
student, but, with firm authority, grasps what it is given. The remainder of
your remarks are perceptive.
Questioner: The Experience is seated upon the square of the material
illusion which is colored much darker than in Card Number Three.
However, there is a cat inside of this square. I am guessing as experience is
gained the second-density nature of the illusion is understood and the
negative and positive aspects separate. Would Ra comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. This interpretation varies markedly from Ra’s intention. We
direct the attention to the cultural meaning of the great cat which guards.
What, O student, does it guard? And with what oriflamme does it lighten
that darkness of manifestation? The polarities are, indeed, present; the
separation nonexistent except through the sifting which is the result of
cumulative experience. Other impressions were intended by this
configuration of the seated image with its milk-white leg and its pointed
foot.
Questioner: In Card Number Three the feet of the female entity are upon
the unstable platform, signifying the dual polarity by its color. In Card
Number Four one foot is pointed so that if the male entity stands on the toe
it would be carefully balanced. The other foot is pointed to the left. Would
Ra comment on my observation that if the entity stands on this foot it will
be very, very carefully balanced?
Ra: I am Ra. This is an important perception, for it is a key to not only this
concept complex but to others as well. You may see the T-square which, at
times riven as is one foot from secure fundament by the nature of
experience yet still by this same nature of experience, is carefully, precisely,
and architecturally placed in the foundation of this concept complex and,
indeed, in the archetypical mind complex. Experience 7 has the nature of
more effectively and poignantly expressing the architecture of experience,
both the fragility of structure and the surety of structure.
Questioner: It would seem to me, from the configuration of this male
entity in Card Number Four, who looks to the left with the right foot
pointed to the left, that this card would indicate you must be in a defensive
position with respect to the left-hand path, but there is no need to concern


7
    Card Number Four.

                                      154
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94

yourself about protection with respect to the right-hand path. Would Ra
comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Again, this is not the suggestion we wished to offer by
constructing this image. However, the perception cannot be said to be
incorrect.
Questioner: The magical shape is on the right edge of the Card Number
Four which indicates to me that the spiritual experience would be on the
right-hand path. Could Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes. The figure is expressing the nature of experience by
having its attention caught by what may be termed the left-hand catalyst.
Meanwhile, the power, the magic, is available upon the right-hand path.
The nature of experience is such that the attention shall be constantly given
varieties of experience. Those that are presumed to be negative, or
interpreted as negative, may seem in abundance. It is a great challenge to
take catalyst and devise the magical, positive experience. That which is
magical in the negative experience is much longer coming, shall we say, in
the third density.
Questioner: Both the third and fourth archetypes, as I see it, work together
for the sole purpose of creating the polarity in the most efficient manner
possible. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This cannot be said to be incorrect. We suggest contemplation
of this thought complex.
Questioner: Then prior to the veiling process that which we call catalyst
after the veiling was not catalyst simply because it was not efficiently
creating polarity, because this loading process, you might say, that I have
diagrammed, of catalyst passing through the veil and becoming polarized
experience, was not in effect because the viewing of what we call catalyst by
the entity was seen much more clearly as the experience of the one Creator
and not something that was a function of other mind/body/spirit
complexes. Would Ra comment on that statement?
Ra: I am Ra. The concepts discussed seem without significant distortion.
Questioner: Thank you. Then we’re expecting, in Card Number Four, to
see the result of catalytic action and, therefore, a greater definition between
the dark and the light areas. In just glancing at this card we notice that it is
more definitely darkly colored in some areas and more white in others in a
general sense than in Card Number Three, indicating to me that the
separation along the two biases has occurred and should occur in order to
follow the blueprint for experience. Could Ra comment on that?
                                       155
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94

Ra: I am Ra. You are perceptive, O student.
Questioner: The bird in Card Number Three now seems to be internalized
in the center of the entity in Card Number Four in that it has changed from
its flight in Card Number Three. The flight has achieved its objective and
has become a part, a central part, of the experience. Could Ra comment on
that?
Ra: I am Ra. This perception is correct, O student, but what shall the
student find the bird to signify?
Questioner: I would guess that the bird signifies that a communication that
comes as catalyst signified in Card Number Three is accepted by the female
and, used, becomes a portion of the experience. I’m not sure of that at all.
Am I in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. That bears little of sense.
Questioner: I’ll have to work on that.
Then I am guessing that the crossed legs of the entity in Card Four have a
meaning similar to the crux ansata. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The cross formed by the living limbs of the
image signifies that which is the nature of mind/body/spirit complexes in
manifestation within your illusion. There is no experience which is not
purchased by effort of some kind, no act of service-to-self or others which
does not bear a price, to the entity manifesting, commensurate with its
purity. All things in manifestation may be seen in one way or another to be
offering themselves in order that transformations may take place upon the
level appropriate to the action.
Questioner: The bird is within the circle on the front of the entity on Card
Four. Would that have the same significance of the circular part of the crux
ansata?
Ra: I am Ra. It is a specialized form of this meaningful shape. It is
specialized in great part due to the nature of the crossed legs of
manifestation which we have previously discussed.
Questioner: The entity on Card Four wears a strangely shaped skirt. Is
there a significance to the shape of this skirt?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: The skirt is extended toward the left hand but is somewhat
shorter toward the right. There is a black bag hanging from the belt of the
entity on the left side. It seems to me that this black bag has a meaning of

                                      156
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 94

the acquiring of the material possessions of wealth as a part of the left-hand
path. Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. Although this meaning was not intended by Ra as part of this
complex of concepts we find the interpretation quite acceptable.
(Thirty second pause.)
I am Ra. As we observe a lull in the questioning we shall take this
opportunity to say that the level of transferred energy dwindles rapidly and
we would offer the opportunity for one more full question at this working,
if it is desired.
Questioner: I would just state that this card, being male, would indicate
that as experience is gained the mind becomes the motivator or that which
reaches or does more than the simple experiencer it was prior to the gaining
of the catalytic action. There is a greater tendency for the mind to direct the
mind/body/spirit complex, and other than that I would just ask if there is
anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable or to
improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. In the context of your penultimate query we would suggest
that you ponder again the shape of the garment which the image wears.
Such habiliment is not natural. The shape is significant and is so along the
lines of your query.
The support group cares well for the instrument. We would ask that care be
taken as the instrument has been offered the gift of a distortion towards
extreme cold by the fifth-density friend which greets you.
Although you may be less than pleased with the accouterments, may we say
that all was as carefully prepared as each was able. More than that none can
do. Therefore, we thank each for the careful alignments. All is well.
We leave you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the One Glorious
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of
the One. Adonai.




                                      157
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95
                           September 2, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Thank you. What is the situation with respect to our fifth-
density negative associate?
Ra: I am Ra. The aforenamed entity has chosen various means to further its
service and though each is effective in itself, none leads to the lessening of
the dedication to service for others or the valuing of harmonious
interaction. Therefore, the entity, though not quiet as it has been, is
somewhat depolarized on balance.
Questioner: There seems to be an extremely high probability that we will
move from this position to another residence. If we move from this
residence and cease using this room for workings with Ra, is there a
magically appropriate ritual for closing the use of this place of working, or is
there anything that we should do with respect to leaving this particular
place?
Ra: I am Ra. It would be appropriate to remove from this room and, to a
lesser extent, from the dwelling, the charging of what you might call the
distortion towards sanctity. To remove this charge it is valuable either to
write upon your paper your own working or to use existing rituals for the
deconsecration of a sacred place such as one of your churches.
Questioner: Thank you. The new room that we choose for this working
will of course be carefully cleaned and marred surfaces made well. We shall
also use the Banishing Ritual of the Lesser Pentagram prior to a working. Is
there anything else that Ra could suggest? I would like, also, to know if
there is anything in particular that you might suggest with respect to the
particular place that has been chosen for our new location?
Ra: I am Ra. We scan the recent memory configurations of the questioner.
Firstly, there have been some less than harmonious interactions within this
dwelling. The dynamics of this interaction were potent enough to attract a
lesser thought-form. Therefore, we suggest the salting and ritual cleansing
by blessed water of all windows and doorways which offer adit into the
domicile or any out-buildings thereof.

                                      158
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Further, we suggest the hanging of the cut garlic clove in the portion of the
room which has accommodated those whose enjoyment has turned into a
darker emotion centering upon the area we find you call the wet bar, also
the room intended for the sleeping which is found near the kitchen area.
The appropriate words used to bid farewell to those of the lower astral shall
be used in connection with the hanging of the garlic cloves for the period of
approximately 36 of your hours. We believe that this is equivalent to two of
your night periods and one of your lit periods. This should cleanse the
house as you find it to the extent that it is neutral in its vibrations of
harmony, love, and thanksgiving which this group shall then, as the
incarnational experience proceeds, offer to the domicile.
Questioner: I am assuming that we would prepare the blessed water the
same as we prepare the water for the instrument to drink after a session and
would then wipe the windows and doors with this water. This would
probably have to be done in a bucket. I would like to know if this is correct,
and what was meant by salting the windows and doors?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, you may bless the water yourselves or may request so-
called holy water from any blessed place; that is, blessed by intention.
Secondly, the water shall be carefully shaken from the fingers along the sills
of all windows and doors as they have been opened. Thirdly, prior to the
sprinkling of this cleansing, blessing sacrament of water, the salt shall be
trailed along these sills in a line and again allowed to exist in this
configuration for 36 to 48 hours. Then the virgin broom may ritually sweep
the salt out of each window and doorway, sweeping with each stroke the less
fortunate of the vibrations within the dwelling which might find
coexistence with group difficult.
Questioner: I assume that you mean that we should put the salt only on the
outer doorway sills and not on the inner doorway sills in the house. Is that
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We cannot express the nature of salt and water
and garlic with clarity enough to inform you as to the efficacy with which
salt absorbs vibrations which have been requested to move into salt when
salt has been given water. We cannot express the full magical nature of your
water, nor can we express the likeness and attractiveness of the garlic cut to
lower astral forms. The attractiveness is negative and no service-to-self astral
form will accept coexistence with the cut garlic.
Therefore, we offer the suggestions. We also request, carefully, that the
broom be clean and that the garlic be burned. The virginity of the broom is
most efficacious.

                                      159
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Questioner: Let me see if I have the scenario correctly in mind. I’ll repeat
my version of it. We would hang fresh-cut garlic in the area of the wet bar
and in the area of the bedroom that is adjacent to the kitchen area. We
would salt all window sills and all outer wall door sills and then sprinkle
blessed water from our fingers on the salted areas. We would then say the
appropriate words to bid farewell to lower astrals. Those words I am not
sure of. Would Ra comment on the scenario that I have stated?
Ra: I am Ra. Your grasp of our suggestions is good. We note that the salt be
poured in the straight line with no gaps. There are various ritual words of
blessing and farewell to entities such as you are removing. We might suggest
the following.
When the salt is laid you may repeat “We praise the one Creator which gave
to salt the ability to enable those friends, to which we wish to bid farewell,
to find a new home.”
As the water is sprinkled you may say “We give thanks to the one Creator
for the gift of water. Over it the Creator moves Its hand and stirs Its will to
be done.”
The hanging of the cut garlic may be accompanied by the words “We praise
the one Creator for the gift of garlic and bless its ability to offer to those
friends to whom we wish to bid farewell the arrow which points their way
of egress.”
When the sweeping is done you may say “We praise the one Creator and
give thanksgiving for the spiritual cleanliness of this dwelling place.”
As the garlic is burned you may say “We give thanks to the one Creator for
the gift of spiritual cleanliness in our dwelling place and seal the departure
of all those who have left by this exit by the consuming of this substance” .
Questioner: Is there any place more appropriate than any other to hang the
garlic in the room; for instance, over the windows or anything like that? I
know that it is supposed to be hung in the area of the bar but I meant in the
bedroom. Is there any more appropriate place than another?
Ra: I am Ra. The windows and the doorways are most appropriate and, in
addition, we suggest the salting and sprinkling of any door which may lead
elsewhere than out of the dwelling in order to afford to the entities the
understanding that they are not desired elsewhere within the dwelling.
Questioner: I understand that the garlic is to be used at the bar area and the
bedroom that is close to the kitchen and has an exit onto the carport. If I
am correct, those are the only two places that it is to be used. This is
correct, isn’t it?
                                      160
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: We would like to pick the most appropriate room for
sanctifying for the Ra contact. Is there any room that would be most
appropriate that Ra could name?
Ra: I am Ra. When you have finished with your work the dwelling shall be
as a virgin dwelling in the magical sense. You may choose that portion of
the dwelling that seems appropriate and once having chosen it you may
then commence with the same sort of preparation of the place with which
you have been familiar here in this dwelling place.
Questioner: I am assuming that the newly chosen place meets the
parameters for the best contact with Ra on the exterior of the house and I
would like to ask Ra at this time if there are any suggestions with respect to
the exterior of the house?
Ra: I am Ra. The dwelling seems surrounded with the trees and fields of
your countryside. This is acceptable. We suggest the general principle of
preparing each part of your environment as it best suits each in the group
with the beauty which each may feel to be appropriate. There is much of
blessing in the gardening and the care of surroundings, for when this is
accomplished in love of the creation the second-density flowers, plants, and
small animals are aware of this service and return it.
Questioner: On one end of the house are four stalls that have been
occupied by horses. Would it be appropriate or necessary to modify in any
way the condition of that area even though it is outside the living area?
Ra: I am Ra. There has been no undesirable negative energy stored in this
area. Therefore, it is acceptable if physically cleaned.
Questioner: Is there any other comment about our new location that Ra
could make?
Ra: I am Ra. We are gratified that this query was offered to us for there has
been a concentration of negative thought patterns at a distance north to 10°
of north, approximately 45 of what you call yards extending therefrom to all
four directions in a rectangular but irregular shape.
We ask that the garlic be strung approximately 60-70 feet beyond the far
verge of this area which is approximately 57 yards from the dwelling on a
bearing north to 10° of north. We suggest that the garlic be hung in the
funnel so that the energies are drawn into the south small end of the funnel
and traduced northward and away from the dwelling. The procedure of the
hanging will be one for testing your ingenuity but there are several ways to
suspend the substance and it is well to do so.
                                      161
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Questioner: I envision a cardboard funnel approximately three feet in
length and then a small cardboard of the same configuration inside of that
funnel, the garlic placed between the two cardboard surfaces so that the
garlic actually makes a funnel itself held in place by the two cardboard
cones. The smaller end of the cone would be toward the house and the
larger end would be away from the house.
I would also like to know that I am accurately aware of the position that we
are talking about. Taking a specific point on the house such as the front
door, I suspect that the direction is up toward the road that leads out of the
property. An exact measurement from the doorknob to the center of the
area of negativity of which we speak would be helpful. Would Ra comment
on that?
Ra: I am Ra. We were working from the other side of the dwelling.
However, the exact distance is not important due to the generalized nature
of the astral leavings. The heading would be approximately 10° east of north
to 5° east of north. This is not a heading in which absolute fastidiousness
needs be paramount. The yardage is approximately as given. As to the
hanging of the garlic, it must be able to be blown by the wind. Therefore,
the structure which was envisioned is less than optimal. We might suggest
the stringing between two placed posts on either side of the funnel of the
strung cloves.
Questioner: Would a wire framework such as chickenwire which has a
small inch-square mesh or something like that shaped into a cone with the
garlic attached to the cone with the small end toward the house and the
open end away from the house strung between two poles be appropriate?
Ra: I am Ra. That is appropriate. You see in this case the center of the
negativity is as described, but there will be a general cleansing of the
dwelling and its acreage by this means. One action you might take in order
to improve the efficacy of the cleansing of the environment is the walking of
the perimeter with the opened clove in hand, swinging the clove. No words
need be said unless each wishes to silently or verbally speak those words
given for garlic previously.
Questioner: Is there any other thing that we can do to prepare this new
place that Ra could mention at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. There are no more specific suggestions for the specific location
you contemplate. In general, the cleanliness is most helpful. The removal
from the mind complex of those thoughts not of harmony is most helpful
and those practices which increase faith and will that the spirit may do its
work are most helpful.

                                     162
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Questioner: After the suggestions are accomplished with respect to
cleansing of the property, does Ra anticipate our contact with Ra will be as
efficient there as in this particular place?
Ra: I am Ra. All places in which this group dwells in love and thanksgiving
are acceptable to us.
Questioner: Thank you. A question has been asked which I will ask at this
time. In processing the catalyst of dreams is there a universal language of the
unconscious mind which may be used to interpret dreams, or does each
entity have a unique language in its own unconscious mind which it may
use to interpret the meaning of dreams?
Ra: I am Ra. There is what might be called a partial vocabulary of the
dreams due to the common heritage of all mind/body/spirit complexes. Due
to each entity’s unique incarnational experiences there is an overlay which
grows to be a larger and larger proportion of the dream vocabulary as the
entity gains experience.
Questioner: Thank you. In the last session you indicated in the statement
about the immature male meeting the immature female that the
information exchanged was quite different with respect to what occurred
because of the veil. Would you give an example of the information exchange
prior to the veil for the same case?
Ra: I am Ra. Given this same case; that is, the random red-ray sexual
arousal being activated in both male and female, the communication would
far more likely have been to the subject of the satisfying of that red-ray,
sexual impulse. When this had occurred other information such as the
naming could be offered with clear perception. It is to be noted that the
catalyst which may be processed by the pre-veil experience is insignificant
compared to the catalyst offered to the thoroughly bemused male and
female after the veil. The confusion which this situation, simplistic though
it is, offers is representative of the efficiency of the enlargement of the
catalytic processes occurring after the veiling.
Questioner: For the condition of meeting after the veiling process, either
entity will choose, as a function of its previous biases or Card Four, the
experience and the way in which it will handle the situation with respect to
polarity, therefore probably producing more catalyst for itself along the
chosen path of polarization. Would Ra comment on this statement?
Ra: I am Ra. This statement is correct.
Questioner: In Card Four in the last session we spoke of the shape of the
skirt and it has occurred to us that the skirt of the entity representing the

                                      163
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

archetype of the Experience of the Mind is extended to the left to indicate
that other-selves would not be able to get close to this entity if it had chosen
the left-hand path. There would be a greater separation between it and
other-selves, whereas if it had chosen the right-hand path there would be
much less of a separation. Would Ra comment on that observation?
Ra: I am Ra. The student is perceptive.
Questioner: And it seems that the square upon which the entity sits, which
is almost totally black, is a representation of the material illusion and the
white cat is guarding the right-hand path which is now separated in
experience from the left. Would Ra comment on that observation?
Ra: I am Ra. O student, your sight almost sees that which was intended.
However, the polarities need no guardians. What, then, O student, needs
the guard?
Questioner: What I meant to say was that the entity is guarded along the
right-hand path, once it has chosen this path, from effects of the material
illusion that are of the negative polarity. Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. This is an accurate perception of our intent, O student. We
may note that the great cat guards in direct proportion to the purity of the
manifestations of intention and the purity of inner work done along this
path.
Questioner: From that statement I interpret the following. If the
Experience of the Mind has sufficiently chosen the right-hand path, and as
total purity is approached in the choosing of the right-hand path, then total
imperviousness from the effect of the left-hand catalyst is also approached.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is exquisitely perceptive. The seeker which has purely
chosen the service-to-others path shall certainly not have a variant apparent
incarnational experience. There is no outward shelter in your illusion from
the gusts, flurries, and blizzards of quick and cruel catalyst.
However, to the pure, all that is encountered speaks of the love and the
light of the one infinite Creator. The cruelest blow is seen with an ambiance
of challenges offered and opportunities to come. Thusly, the great pitch of
light is held high above such an one so that all interpretation may be seen to
be protected by light.
Questioner: I have often wondered about the action of random and
programmed catalyst with respect to the entity with the very strong positive
or negative polarization. Would either polarity be free to a great extent from
random catalyst such as great natural catastrophes or warfare or something
                                      164
                  The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

like that which generates a lot of random catalyst in the physical vicinity of
a highly polarized entity? Does this great cat, then, have an effect on such
random catalyst on the right-hand path?
Ra: I am Ra. In two circumstances this is so. Firstly, if there has been the
preincarnative choice that, for instance, one shall not take life in the service
of the cultural group, events shall fall in a protective manner. Secondly, if
any entity is able to dwell completely in unity the only harm that may occur
to it is the changing of the outward physical, yellow-ray vehicle into the
more light-filled mind/body/spirit complex’s vehicle by the process of
death. All other suffering and pain is as nothing to one such as this.
We may note that this perfect configuration of the mind, body, and spirit
complexes, while within the third-density vehicle, is extraordinarily rare.
Questioner: Am I to understand, then, that there is no protection at all if
the Experience of the Mind has chosen the left-hand path and that path is
traveled? All random catalyst may affect the negatively polarized individual
as a function of the statistical nature of the random catalyst. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You may note some of those of your peoples
which, at this space/time nexus, seek places of survival. This is due to the
lack of protection when service to self is invoked.
Questioner: The possibility of the legs of the entity of Card Four being at
right angles was linked with the tesseract 8, mentioned in a much earlier
session by Ra, as the direction of transformation from space/time into
time/space and I was thinking that possibly it was also linked with the crux
ansata. Am I in any way correct in this observation?
Ra: I am Ra. This shall be the last query of this working, as transferred
energy wanes. The observation of the right angles and their
transformational meaning is most perceptive, O student. Each of the images
leading to the Transformations of Mind, Body, and Spirit and ultimately to
the great transformative Choice has the increasing intensity of increasing
articulation of concept; that is to say, each image in which you find this
angle may increasingly be seen to be a more and more stridently calling
voice of opportunity to use each resource, be it experience as you now
observe or further images, for the grand work of the adept which builds
towards transformation using the spirit’s bountiful shuttle to intelligent
infinity. Please ask any brief queries at this space/time.


8
    tesseract: in speculative mathematics, a cube which has developed at least one
    additional dimension.

                                         165
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 95

Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We observe some small worsening of the distortions of the
dorsal side. This is due to the nature of the beginning use of the swirling
waters. The difficulties are physically accentuated as the swirling waters
begin to aid the musculature surrounding the nexi of distortions. We
encourage the swirling waters and note that complete immersion in them is
somewhat more efficacious than the technique now used .
We ask that the support group attempt to aid the instrument in
remembering to preserve the physical energies and not expend them upon
movements associated with the packing, as you call this activity, and the
movement between geographical locations upon your sphere.
The alignments are excellent. All is well.
We leave you glorying in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the mighty peace of the one
infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      166
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96
                          September 9, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical energy deficit is significantly greater than the last
asking. There has been substantive lessening also of the vital energies,
although the perquisite degree of energy for mental/emotional distortions of
normalcy are yet available.
Questioner: The instrument asks if the house which is to be our new
location is capable of being transformed by painting and cleaning? We don’t
plan to put down all new carpets. Would cleaning the carpets that are there
now be acceptable?
I want to bring this particular house up to acceptable limits so that it is
neutral after we do the salting. I have a concern only for the conditions for
our work there. The physical location isn’t that important. In fact I don’t
consider that important at all. Could Ra comment on this?
Ra: I am Ra. It is, of course, the preference of this group which is the only
consideration in the situation for the contact with Ra.
The domicile in question has already been offered a small amount of
blessing by this group through its presence and, as we have previously
stated, each of your days spent in love, harmony, and thanksgiving will
continue transforming the dwelling.
It is correct, as we have previously stated, that physical cleanliness is most
important. Therefore, the efforts shall be made to most thoroughly cleanse
the dwelling. In this regard it is to be noted that neither in the dwelling as a
whole wherein you now reside or in the chamber of this working is there an
absence of your dust, earth, and other detritus which is in toto called dirt. If
the intention is to clean, as much as is physically possible, the location, the
requirements for physical cleanliness are fulfilled. It is only when a lower
astral entity has, shall we say, placed portions of itself in the so-called dirt
that care should be taken to remove the sentient being. These instructions
we have given.
May we note that just as each entity strives in each moment to become
more nearly one with the Creator but falls short, just so is physical
spotlessness striven for but not achieved. In each case the purity of intention

                                      167
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96

and thoroughness of manifestation are appreciated. The variance between
the attempt and the goal is never noted and may be considered
unimportant.
Questioner: The sequence of events that I am considering is first the
painting and then the cleaning, then the moving in of the furniture, then
the salting and use of garlic. Is this as good as any other sequence or would
another sequence be better?
Ra: I am Ra. Any sequence which results in the cleansing is acceptable. It is
to be noted that the thresholds are not to be crossed during the cleansing.
Since such stricture upon use of the limen may affect your considerations
we make note of this.
Questioner: Would Ra comment on the technique of blessing the water
that we will use to sprinkle the salt? I assume that we just sprinkle the water
directly off of our finger tips onto the line of salt. How much water, in
general, should be sprinkled on the salt? How wet should we get it? I would
like to get this done right.
Ra: I am Ra. The blessing of the water may be that one we have previously
given, or it may be that one which is written within the liturgy of this
instrument’s distortion of the worship of the one Creator, or it may simply
be obtained from what you call your Catholic Church in the form of holy
water.
The intention of blessing is the notable feature of blessed water. The water
may be sprinkled not so that all salt is soaked but so that a goodly portion
has been dampened. This is not a physical working. The substances need to
be seen in their ideal state so that water may be seen to be enabling the salt.
Questioner: I have planned to re-draw the tarot cards omitting the
extraneous additions by those who came after Ra and I would like quickly
to go through those things that I intend to eliminate from each card and ask
Ra if there is anything else that should be eliminated to make the cards as
they were before the astrological and other appendages were added.
I would eliminate all of the letters from the edge of the card with the
possible exception of the number of the card. That would be the case for all
of the cards. In Card Number One I would eliminate the star, the wand in
the Magician’s hand, and I understand that the sphere remains but I am not
really sure where it should be. Would Ra comment on that please?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, the elimination of letters is acceptable. Secondly, the
elimination of stars is acceptable in all cases. Thirdly, the elimination of the


                                      168
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96

wand is appropriate. Fourthly, the sphere may be seen to be held by the
thumb and index and second finger.
Fifthly, we would note that it is not possible to offer what you may call a
pure deck, if you would use this term, of tarot due to the fact that when
these images were first drawn there was already distortion in various and
sundry ways, mostly cultural.
Sixthly, although it is good to view the images without the astrological
additions, it is to be noted that the more general positions, phases, and
characteristics of each concept complex are those which are significant. The
removal of all distortions is unlikely and, to a great extent, unimportant.
Questioner: I didn’t think that we could ever remove all distortions but it is
very difficult to work with or interpret these cards because of the quality of
the drawing, and as we go through them we get a better idea of what some
of these things are and how they should be drawn. I think that we can
improve on the quality of the cards and also remove some of the extraneous
material that is misleading.
On the second card we should remove the letters and the stars. At the center
of the female form here she is wearing something that looks something like
a crux ansata and we should change that. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We perceive an incomplete query. Please requestion.
Questioner: I think that I should put a crux ansata in the place of this thing
that looks a little like a crux ansata on the front of the female. Is that
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then as to the thing that she wears on her head, that, I believe,
is a bit confusing. What should it be shaped like?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall allow the student to ponder this point. We note that
although it is an astrologically based addition to the concept complex it is
not entirely unacceptable when viewed with a certain feeling. Therefore, we
suggest, O student, that you choose whether to remove the crown or to
name its meaning in such a way as to enhance the concept complex.
Questioner: Would Ra please give me any information possible on the
ratios of dimensions, and the shape of the crux ansata as it should be made
or drawn?
Ra: I am Ra. No.



                                     169
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96

Questioner: In Card Number Three we will remove all the letters and the
stars and I assume that the little cups around the outside of the rays
representing the sun should be removed? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes
Questioner: In Card Number Four we will remove all the letters and the
stars and it seems that again we have a situation of removing the wand and
putting the sphere in the hand. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Again, this is a matter of choice. Though astrological in
nature, this particular scepter has possibilities of relevance in the originally
intended concept complex.
This instrument is experiencing some small lack of that distortion which
you call proper breathing due to the experience of your near past, as you
perceive it. Therefore, as this instrument has requested a substantial enough
amount of transferred energy to be retained that it might effect a
comfortable re-entry, we shall at this time ask for one more query, after
noting the following.
We did not complete our statement upon the dimensions of the crux
ansata. It is given in many places. There are decisions to be made as to
which drawing of this image is the appropriate one. We may, of course,
suggest viewing the so-called Great Pyramid if the puzzle is desired. We do
not wish to work this puzzle. It was designed in order that in its own time it
be deciphered. In general, of course, this image has the meaning previously
stated.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. Continue in harmony, communication, praise, and
thanksgiving.
We would note that this instrument’s distortions would be lessened were it
to refrain from the speaking to some extent for a diurnal period or perhaps
two if the difficulty remains. We would also recommend against the activity
such as running which would cause rapid respiration. This after-effect of the
greeting is not necessarily long-lasting. However, as this instrument has
some blood vessels in the forward regions of the skull; that is, the
integument covering the skull, which are greatly swollen at this time and
since this instrument has the distortion known as the streptococcal
infection, it is best to be full of care for a short period in order that the
distortions do not catapult the entity into longer-term after-effects.
All is well. We find the alignments satisfactory.
                                       170
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 96

I am Ra. I leave you in the love and light of the Infinite One. Go forth,
therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                     171
            The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97
                          September 15, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: What is the situation with our fifth-density negative friend?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated.
Questioner: Are there any items in the first four cards not of Ra’s intention
that we could remove to present a less confusing card as we make our new
drawings?
Ra: I am Ra. We find much material in this query which would constitute
repetition. May we suggest rephrasing the query?
Questioner: Possibly I didn’t phrase that the way I meant to. We had
already determined the items that should be removed from the first four
cards and my question was: had I missed anything that should be removed
that was not of Ra’s original intention?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall repeat our opinion that there are several concepts
which, in each image, are astrologically based. However, these concepts are
not without merit within the concept complex intended by Ra, given the
perception by the student of these concepts in an appropriate manner.
We wish not to form that which may be considered by any
mind/body/spirit complex to be a complete and infallible series of images.
There is a substantial point to be made in this regard. We have been, with
the questioner’s aid, investigating the concept complexes of the great
architecture of the archetypical mind. To more clearly grasp the nature, the
process, and the purpose of archetypes, Ra provided a series of concept
complexes. In no way whatsoever should we, as humble messengers of the
one infinite Creator, wish to place before the consideration of any
mind/body/spirit complex which seeks its evolution the palest tint of the
idea that these images are anything but a resource for working in the area of
the development of the faith and the will.
To put this into perspective we must gaze then at the stunning mystery of
the one infinite Creator. The archetypical mind does not resolve any
paradoxes or bring all into unity. This is not the property of any source

                                      172
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97

which is of the third-density. Therefore, may we ask the student to look up
from inward working and behold the glory, the might, the majesty, the
mystery, and the peace of oneness. Let no consideration of bird or beast,
darkness or light, shape or shadow keep any which seeks from the central
consideration of unity.
We are not messengers of the complex. We bring the message of unity. In
this perspective only may we affirm the value to the seeker of adepthood of
the grasping, articulating, and use of this resource of the deep mind
exemplified by the concept complex of the archetypes.
Questioner: Thank you. Card Number Five, the Significator of the Mind,
indicates, firstly, as I see it, simply a male within a rectangularly structured
form which suggests to me that the Significator of the Mind in third density
is well bounded within the illusion, as is also suggested by the fact that the
base of the male is a rectangular form showing no ability for movement.
Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. O student, you have grasped the barest essence of the nature of
the Significator’s complete envelopment within the rectangle. Consider for
the self, O student, whether your thoughts can walk. The abilities of the
most finely honed mentality shall not be known without the use of the
physical vehicle which you call the body. Through the mouth the mind may
speak. Through the limbs the mind may affect action.
Questioner: The entity looks to the left, indicating that the mind has the
tendency to notice more easily catalyst of a negative essence. Would Ra
comment on that observation?
Ra: I am Ra. This is substantially correct.
Questioner: There are two small entities at the bottom, one black and one
white. I will first ask Ra if this drawing is correct in the coloring? Is the
black one in the proper position with respect to Ra’s original drawings?
Ra: I am Ra. That which you perceive as black was first red. Other than this
difference, the beings in the concept complex are placed correctly.
Questioner: The red coloration is a mystery to me. We had originally
decided that these represented the polarization of the mind. Would Ra
comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. The indications of polarity are as presumed by the questioner.
The symbolism of old for the left-hand path was the russet coloration.




                                      173
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97

We shall pause at this time if the questioner will be patient. There are fairly
serious difficulties with the instrument’s throat. We shall attempt to
ameliorate the situation and suggest the rewalking of the Circle of One.
(The Circle of One was rewalked and breath expelled two feet above the
instrument’s head.)
Ra: I am Ra. Please continue.
Questioner: What was the nature of the problem?
Ra: I am Ra. The fifth-density entity which greets this instrument affected a
previous difficulty distorting the throat and chest area of the instrument.
Some fraction of this distortion remained unmentioned by the instrument.
It is helpful if the instrument speaks as clearly as possible to the support
group of any difficulties that more care may be taken.
However, we find very little distortion left in the chest area of the
instrument. However, immediately preceding the working the instrument
was offered an extreme activation of what you may call the allergies and the
mucous from the flow which this distortion causes began to cause difficulty
to the throat. At this juncture the previous potential for the tightening of
the throat was somewhat activated by reflex of the yellow-ray, chemical
body over which we have only gross control.
We would appreciate you reminding us to cause this instrument to cough
before or after each query for the remainder of this working. Once
conscious, this instrument should have no serious difficulty.
Questioner: I was wondering why the dark entity was on the right side of
the card in relation to the Significator. Could Ra comment on that after
making the instrument cough?
Ra: (Cough) The nature of … We pause.
(Ten second pause.)
I am Ra. There was a serious pain flare. We may now continue.
The nature of polarity is interesting in that those experiences offered to the
Significator as positive frequently become recorded as productive of biases
which may be seen to be negative, whereas the fruit of those experiences
apparently negative is frequently found to be helpful in the development of
the service-to-others bias. As this is perhaps the guiding characteristic of that
which the mind processes and records, these symbols of polarity have thusly
been placed.



                                      174
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97

You may note that the hands of the central image indicate the appropriate
bias for right and left-hand working; that is, the right hand gestures in
service-to-others, offering its light outward. The left hand attempts to
absorb the power of the spirit and point it for its use alone.
Questioner: The eight cartouches at the bottom would possibly signify the
energy centers and the evolution through those centers with the possibility
for positive or negative polarization because of the white and black
coloration of the figures. Would Ra comment on that after making the
instrument cough?
Ra: (Cough) I am Ra. The observations of the student are perceptive. It is
informative to continue the study of octaves in association with this concept
complex. Many are the octaves of a mind/body/spirit complex’s beingness.
There is not one that does not profit from being pondered in connection
with the considerations of the nature of the development of polarity
exemplified by the concept complex of your Card Number Five.
Questioner: Do the symbols on the face of each of these little cartouches
such as the birds and the other symbols have a meaning in this card that is
of value in considering the archetypes? Could you answer that after making
the instrument cough?
Ra: (Cough) I am Ra. These symbols are letters and words much as your
language would receive such an entablature. They are, to a great extent,
enculturated by a people not of your generation. Let us, in the rough,
suggest that the information written upon these cartouches be understood
to be such as the phrase, “And you shall be born again to eternal life.”
Questioner: Thank you. I thought that the wings on top of the card might
indicate the protection of the spirit over the process of evolution. Would Ra
comment on that after having the instrument cough?
Ra: (Cough) I am Ra. We shall end this session for we are having
considerable difficulty in using the sympathetic nervous system in order to
aid the instrument in providing sufficient of your air for its respiration.
Therefore, we prematurely suggest ending this session.
Is there any brief query before we leave this instrument?
Questioner: It’s not necessary to answer this if you want to end right now
for the instrument’s benefit, but is there anything that we can do to
improve the contact or make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. The support group functions well.


                                     175
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 97

It is suggested that the instrument be encouraged to take steps to recover
completely from the distortion towards the aching of the throat and, to a
lesser extent, the chest. There is no way in which we or you may remove
that working which has been done. It simply must be removed by physical
recovery of the normal distortion. This is not easy due to this instrument’s
tendency towards allergy.
The alignments are being carefully considered.
I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, glorying and rejoicing in the love and the
light of the infinite Creator. Go forth, then, in the great dance, empowered
by the peace of the one infinite Creator. Adonai.
(Session #98, September 24, 1982, contains only personal material and was, for
that reason, removed from The Law of One, Book IV.)




                                      176
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 99
                          November 18, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Would you please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s physical deficit continues but has the
potential for the lessening due to the removal in your probable future of
foodstuffs to which the instrument has significant allergy. The vital energy
levels are somewhat lessened than the last asking but remain strong. The
change in the mental/emotional energy level is towards the distortion of the
weakening of this complex.
Questioner: We now have an additional set of tarot images. Which of these
two sets are closer to Ra’s original intention?
Ra: I am Ra. The principle which moves in accordance with the dynamics
of teach/learning with most efficiency is constancy. We could explore the
archetypical mind using that set of images produced by the one known as
Fathman or we could use those which have been used.
In point of fact, those which are being used have some subtleties which
enrich the questioning. As we have said, this set of images is not that which
we gave. This is not material. We could use any of a multitude of devised
tarot sets. Although this must be at the discretion of the questioner, we
suggest the maintaining of one and only one set of distorted images to be
used for the querying and note that the images you now use are good.
Questioner: The wings above Card Five, I am guessing, have to do with a
protection over the Significator of the Mind. I am guessing that they are a
symbol of protection. Is this in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us say that you are not incorrect but rather less than
correct. The Significator owns a covenant with the spirit which it shall in
some cases manifest through the thought and action of the adept. If there is
protection in a promise, then you have chosen the correct sound vibration,
for the outstretched wings of spirit, high above manifestation, yet draw the
caged mind onward.
Questioner: Thank you. In Card Number Six I see the Transformation of
the Mind, the male with crossed arms, representing transformation. The
transformation is possible either toward the left or the right-hand path. The
path is beckoned or led by the female, the Potentiator. The one on the right

                                     177
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 99

has the serpent of wisdom at the brow and is fully clothed, the one on the
left having less clothing and indicating that the Potentiator is more
concerned or attracted to the physical as the left-hand path is chosen and
more concerned and attracted to the mental as the right-hand path is
chosen.
The creature above points an arrow at the left-hand path indicating that if
this path is chosen the chips, shall we say, will fall where they may, the path
being unprotected as far as the activity of catalyst. The intellectual abilities
of the chooser of the left-hand path would be the main guardian rather than
the designed or built-in protection of the Logos for the right-hand path.
The entity firing the arrow seems to be a second density entity which
indicates that this catalyst could be produced by a lesser evolved source, you
might say. Would Ra comment on these observations?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall speak upon several aspects seriatim. Firstly, let us
examine the crossed arms of the male who is to be transformed. What, O
student, do you make of the crossing? What see you in this tangle? There is
a creative point to be found in this element which was not discussed
overmuch by the questioner.
Let us now observe the evaluation of the two females. The observation that
to the left-hand path moves the roughly physical and to the right-hand path
the mental has a shallow correctness. There are deeper observations to be
made concerning the relationship of the great sea of the unconscious mind
to the conscious mind which may fruitfully be pursued. Remember, O
student, that these images are not literal. They haunt rather than explicate.
Many use the trunk and roots of mind as if that portion of mind were a
badly used, prostituted entity. Then this entity gains from this great
storehouse that which is rough, prostituted, and without great virtue. Those
who turn to the deep mind, seeing it in the guise of the maiden, go forth to
court it. The courtship has nothing of plunder in its semblance and may be
protracted, yet the treasure gained by such careful courtship is great. The
right-hand and left-hand transformations of the mind may be seen to differ
by the attitude of the conscious mind towards its own resources as well as
the resources of other-selves.
We now speak of that genie, or elemental, or mythic figure, culturally
determined, which sends the arrow to the left-hand transformation. This
arrow is not the arrow which kills but rather that which, in its own way,
protects. Those who choose separation, that being the quality most
indicative of the left-hand path, are protected from other-selves by a
strength and sharpness equivalent to the degree of transformation which the
mind has experienced in the negative sense. Those upon the right-hand
                                      178
                The Law of One, Book IV, Session 99

path have no such protection against other-selves for upon that path the
doughty seeker shall find many mirrors for reflection in each other-self it
encounters.
Questioner: In the previous session you mentioned the use of the forty-five
minute interval of the tape recorders as a signal for the end of the session. Is
this still the appropriate time?
Ra: I am Ra. This is, of course, at the discretion of the questioner for this
instrument has some transferred energy and remains open as it has
unfailingly done. However, the fragility of the instrument has been more
and more appreciated by us. We, in the initial observations, saw the
strength of will and overestimated greatly the recuperative abilities of the
physical complex of this entity.
Therefore, we may say that ending a working at approximately this amount
of energy expenditure; that is, some point soon following upon the sound
vibration of which you speak, would be appropriate and, insofar as we may
determine, may well extend the incarnational amount of your space/time
which this instrument shall be able to offer to this contact.
Questioner: In that case I will just ask this short question as we terminate
this session. I want to know if the Logos of this system planned for the
mating process as possibly depicted in Card Six—I don’t know if this is
related to some type of DNA imprinting. In many second-density creatures
there seems to be some sort of imprinting that creates a lifetime mating
relationship and I was wondering if this was also carried into third density?
Ra: I am Ra. There are some of your second-density fauna which have
instinctually imprinted monogamous mating processes. The third-density
physical vehicle which is the basic incarnational tool of manifestation upon
your planet arose from entities thusly imprinted, all the aforesaid being
designed by the Logos.
The free will of third-density entities is far stronger than the rather mild
carryover from second-density DNA encoding and it is not part of the
conscious nature of many of your mind/body/spirit complexes to be
monogamous due to the exercise of free will. However, as has been noted
there are many signposts in the deep mind indicating to the alert adept the
more efficient use of catalyst. As we have said, the Logos of your peoples has
a bias towards kindness.
Questioner: Thank you. In closing I will ask if there is anything that we can
do to make the instrument more comfortable or to improve the contact?



                                      179
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 99

Ra: I am Ra. We note the relative discomfort of this group at this
space/time and offer those previous statements made by Ra as possible aids
to the regaining of the extraordinary harmony which this group has the
capability of experiencing in a stable manner.
We find the addition of the swirling waters to be helpful. The
appurtenances are conscientiously aligned.
We encourage the conscious strengthening of those invisible ribbands which
fly from the wrists of those who go forward to seek what you may call the
Grail. All is well, my friends. We leave you in hopes that each may find true
colors to fly in that great metaphysical quest and urge each to urge each
other in love, praise, and thanksgiving.
I am Ra. We leave you in the love and light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the One Glorious infinite
Creator. Adonai.




                                    180
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 100
                          November 29, 1982
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you, my friends, in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. It is as previously stated with the exception of the vital energy
distortion which leans more towards strength/weakness than the last asking.
Questioner: Thank you. To continue with the tarot, I would like to make
the additional observation with respect to Card Number Six that with the
male’s arms being crossed, if the female to his right pulls on his left hand it
would turn his entire body and the same is true for the female on the left
pulling on his right hand from the other side. This is my interpretation of
what is meant by the tangle of the arms. The transformation, then, occurs
by the pull which tends to turn the entity toward the left or the right-hand
path. Would Ra comment on that observation?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall. The concept of the pull towards mental polarity may
well be examined in the light of what the student has already accreted
concerning the nature of the conscious, exemplified by the male, and the
unconscious, exemplified by the female. Indeed, both the prostituted and
the virginal deep mind invite and await the reaching.
In this image of Transformation of Mind, then, each of the females points
the way it would go, but is not able to move, nor are the two female entities
striving to do so. They are at rest. The conscious entity holds both and will
turn itself one way or the other or, potentially, backwards and forwards,
rocking first one way then the other and not achieving the transformation.
In order for the Transformation of Mind to occur, one principle governing
the use of the deep mind must be abandoned.
It is to be noted that the triangular shape formed by the shoulders and
crossed elbows of consciousness is a shape to be associated with
transformation. Indeed, you may see this shape echoed twice more in the
image, each echo having its own riches to add to the impact of this complex
of concepts.
Questioner: Thank you. We will probably return to this card in the next
session with more observations after we consider Ra’s comments. To make
efficient use of our time at this time I will make some notes with respect to
Card Seven.

                                      181
                 The Law of One, Book IV, Session 100

First, the veil between the conscious and unconscious mind is removed. The
veil, I assume, is the curtain at the top and is lifted. Even though this veil
has been removed the perception of intelligent infinity is still distorted by
the beliefs and means of seeking of the seeker. Would Ra comment on that?
Ra: I am Ra. As one observes the veil of the image of the Great Way of
Mind it may be helpful to ideate using the framework of environment. The
Great Way of Mind, Body, or Spirit is intended to limn the milieu within
which the work of mind, body, or spirit shall be placed.
Thusly, the veil is shown both somewhat lifted and still present, since the
work of mind and its transformation involves progressive lifting of the great
veil betwixt the conscious and deep minds. The complete success of this
attempt is not properly a portion of third-density work and, more
especially, third-density mental processes.
Questioner: The fact that the veil is raised higher on the right-hand side
indicates to me that the adept choosing the positive polarity would have
greater success in penetrating the veil. Would Ra comment?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a true statement if it is realized that the questioner
speaks of potential success. Indeed, your third-density experience is
distorted or skewed so that the positive orientation has more aid than the
so-called negative.
Questioner: It would also seem to me that, since Ra stated in the last
session that the limit of the viewpoint is the source of all distortions 9, the
very nature of the service-to-self distortions that create the left-hand path
are a function of the veil. Therefore, they are dependent, you might say, to
some degree on at least a partial continued veiling. Does this make any
sense?
Ra: I am Ra. There is the thread of logic in what you suppose.
The polarities are both dependent upon a limited viewpoint. However, the
negative polarity depends more heavily upon the illusory separation betwixt
the self and all other mind/body/spirit complexes. The positive polarity
attempts to see through the illusion to the Creator in each mind/body/spirit
complex, but for the greater part is concerned with behaviors and thoughts
directed towards other-selves in order to be of service. This attitude, in
itself, is full of the stuff of your third-density illusion.



9
    Ra made this statement in response to a personal question which, along with its
    answer, was removed from the last session.

                                        182
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 100

Questioner: The crown of three stars, we are guessing, would represent the
balancing of the mind, body, and spirit. Is this in any way correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This device is astrological in origin and the interpretation
given somewhat confusing. We deal, in this image, with the environment of
mind. It is perhaps appropriate to release the starry crown from its stricture.
Questioner: The small black-or russet-and white entities have changed so
that they now appear to be sphinxes which we are assuming means that the
catalyst has been mastered. I am also assuming that they act as the power
that moves the chariot depicted here so this mastery enables the mind in its
transformation to become mobile unlike it was prior to this mastery, locked
as it was within the illusion. Would Ra comment?
Ra: I am Ra. Firstly, we ask that the student consider the Great Way not as
the culmination of a series of seven activities or functions but as a far more
clearly delineated image of the environment within which the mind, body,
or spirit shall function. Therefore, the culturally determined creatures called
sphinxes do not indicate mastery over catalyst.
The second supposition, that of placing the creatures as the movers of the
chariot of mind, has far more virtue. You may connote the concept of time
to the image of the sphinx. The mental and mental/emotional complex
ripens and moves and is transformed in time.
Questioner: There is the forty-five minute signal. Does Ra suggest a
termination of this session, taking into consideration the instrument’s
condition?
Ra: I am Ra. Information pertinent to this query has been previously
covered. The choice of termination time, as you call it, is solely that of the
questioner until the point at which we perceive the instrument beginning to
use its vital resources due to the absence of transferred or native physical
energy. The instrument remains open, as always.
Questioner: In that case I will ask only one more question and that will
have to do with the sword and the scepter. It seems that the sword would
represent the power of the negative adept in controlling other-selves and the
scepter would indicate the power of the positive adept operating in the
unity of the mind, body, and spirit. However, they seem to be in the
opposite hands than I would have guessed. Would Ra comment on these
observations?
Ra: I am Ra. These symbols are astrological in origin. The shapes, therefore,
may be released from their stricture.


                                      183
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 100

We may note that there is an overriding spiritual environment and
protection for the environment of the mind. We may further note that the
negatively polarized adept will attempt to fashion that covenant for its own
use whereas the positively polarized entity may hold forth that which is
exemplified by the astrological sword; that is, light and truth.
Questioner: Would there be two more appropriate objects or symbols to
have the entity in Card Seven holding other than the ones shown?
Ra: I am Ra. We leave this consideration to you, O student, and shall
comment upon any observation which you may make.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to improve the contact?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well. The appurtenances are most conscientiously placed.
We thank this diligent group. There is much greater distortion towards
harmony at this asking and we join you in praise and thanksgiving. This is
always the greatest boon to improvement of the contact, for it is the
harmony of the group which supports this contact.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the One. Go forth,
therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the one infinite
Creator. Adonai.
(RA, Session #101, December 21, 1982, and RA, Session #102, April 22, 1983,
contain only personal material—pertaining to the illnesses of the instrument and
the scribe which delayed the Ra contact during the winter—and were, for that
reason, removed from The Law of One, Book IV.)




                                      184
           The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103
                               June 10, 1983
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. We communicate now.
Questioner: Could you first please give me the condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The physical distortions of the instrument remain serious.
Further, the vital energies of this mind/body/spirit complex are much
diminished, although acceptable for the needs of this working. This is to be
noted as the lowest or most distorted vital reading of this all-important
energy. The mental and mental/emotional distortions are as last seen.
We find the will of the instrument, having been unwisely used, to have
encouraged the distortions of vital energy. It is well that the instrument
ponder this.
Questioner: What is the situation with respect to the physical problems
with the digestive portions of the body that the instrument had previously?
Ra: The yellow-ray—We must correct ourselves. I am Ra. Please expel
breath across this instrument’s chest area.
(This was done as directed.)
Ra: I am Ra. The channel is now satisfactory. We find the yellow-ray,
chemical body of the instrument to be exhausted, but to be attempting the
improvement by action such as exercise and diet. We may state that the
infection has not completely left the body complex, although it is far less
virulent.
Questioner: What is the present situation with respect to our fifth-density,
service-to-self oriented companion?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity has, for some period of your space/time, been at
rest. However, it has been alerted to the workings taking place and is soon
to be your companion once again.
Questioner: Can Ra recommend anything that the instrument can do, or
that we can do, to improve any of the energies of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This is previously covered material. We have outlined the path
the instrument may take in thought.
Questioner: I didn’t mean to cover previously covered material. I was
hoping-to add to this anything that we could do to specifically focus on at

                                      185
                  The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103

this time, the best possible thing that we or the instrument could do to
improve these energies, the salient activity.
Ra: I am Ra. Before responding we ask your vigilance during pain flares as
the channel is acceptable but is being distorted periodically by the severe
physical distortions of the yellow-ray, chemical body of the instrument.
Those salient items for the support group are praise and thanksgiving in
harmony. These the group has accomplished with such a degree of
acceptability that we cavil not at the harmony of the group.
As to the instrument, the journey from worth in action to worth in esse is
arduous. The entity has denied itself in order to be free of that which it calls
addiction10. This sort of martyrdom, and here we speak of the small but
symbolically great sacrifice of the clothing, causes the entity to frame a
selfhood in poorness which feeds unworthiness unless the poverty is seen to
be true richness. In other words, good works for the wrong reasons cause
confusion and distortion. We encourage the instrument to value itself and
to see that its true requirements are valued by the self. We suggest
contemplation of true richness of being.
Questioner: Is there anything else that either we or the instrument could do
that would specifically work on the vital energy of the instrument to
increase it?
Ra: I am Ra. We have come up against the full stop of free will.
Questioner: In that case I have a few questions on Card Number Seven in
order to finish off our first run-through of the archetypes of the mind.
There is a T with two right angles above it on the chest of the entity on
Card Seven. We have guessed that the lower T has to do with the possibility
of choosing either path in the transformation and the upper two angles
represent the great way of the left and the right-hand paths in the mental
transformation that makes the change from space/time into time/space, you
might say. This is difficult to express. Is anything correct in this?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes.
Questioner: Would Ra comment on that?




10
     Carla made a New Year’s resolution to give up buying clothes for herself for one
     year.

                                          186
                   The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103

Ra: I am Ra. The use of the tau 11 and the architect’s square is indeed
intended to suggest the proximity of the space/time of the Great Way’s
environment to time/space. We find this observation most perceptive.
The entire mood, shall we say, of the Great Way is indeed dependent upon
its notable difference from the Significator. The Significator is the
significant self, to a great extent but not entirely influenced by the lowering
of the veil.
The Great Way of the Mind, the Body, or the Spirit draws the environment
which has been the new architecture caused by the veiling process and,
thusly, dipped in the great, limitless current of time/space.
Questioner: I am guessing that the wheels of this chariot indicate the ability
of the mind to be able to move in time/space. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot say that the observation is totally incorrect, for
there is as much work in time/space as the individual who evokes this
complex of concepts has assimilated.
However, it would be more appropriate to draw the attention to the fact
that although the chariot is wheeled, it is not harnessed to that which draws
it by a physical or visible harness. What then, O Student, links and
harnesses the chariot’s power of movement to the chariot?
Questioner: I’ll have to think about that. I’ll come back to that.
We were thinking of replacing the sword in the right hand with the magical
sphere and putting a downward-pointing scepter in the left hand, similar to
Card Five, the Significator, as symbols more appropriate for this card.
Would Ra comment on that, please?
Ra: I am Ra. This is quite acceptable, especially if the sphere may be imaged
as spherical and effulgent.
Questioner: The bent left leg of the sphinxes indicates a transformation that
occurs on the left that doesn’t occur on the right, possibly an inability in
that position to move. Does this have any merit?
Ra: I am Ra. The observation has merit in that it may serve as the obverse
of the connotation intended. The position is intended to show two items,
one of which is the dual possibilities of the time-full characters there drawn.
The resting is possible in time, as is the progress. If a mixture is attempted,
the upright, moving leg will be greatly hampered by the leg that is bent.

11
     tau: in heraldry, a type of cross called a “tau cross.”

                                             187
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103

The other meaning has to do with the same right angle, with its
architectural squareness, as the device upon the breast of the actor.
Time/space is close in this concept complex, brought close due to the
veiling process and its efficaciousness in producing actors who wish to use
the resources of the mind in order to evolve.
Questioner: I am assuming that the skirt is skewed to the left for the same
reason that it is in Card Number Four, indicating the distance service-to-
self polarized entities keep from others, and I am also assuming that the face
is turned to the left for the same reason that it is in Card Number Five,
because of the nature of catalyst. Is this roughly correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Please expel breath over the breast of the instrument from
right to left.
(This was done as directed.)
I am Ra. That is well.
Your previous supposition is indeed roughly correct. We might also note
that we, in forming the original images for your peoples, were using the
cultural commonplaces of artistic expression of those in Egypt. The face is
drawn to the side most often, as are the feet turned. We made use of this
and, thus, wish to soften the significance of the side-long look. In no case
thus far in these deliberations, however, has any misinterpretation or
unsuitable interpretation been drawn.
Questioner: Our appropriate time limit for this working, I believe, is
rapidly approaching, so I would like to ask what was the problem in this
session when twice in this session we had to expel breath over the
instrument’s chest?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is unaware of the method used to contact Ra.
However, its desire was particularly strong, at the outset of this working, for
this working to transpire. Thus it inadvertently was somewhat premature in
its leaving of the yellow-ray, physical body.
In this state the object was dropped upon the instrument which you call the
tie-pin microphone. The unexpected contact caused injury of the chest
muscles and we would advise some care depending from this working to
avoid stress so that this injury may heal. There is a metaphysical component
to this injury and, therefore, we wished to be quite sure that all portions of
the environment were cleansed. Since this place of working has not its usual
level of protection we used your breath to so cleanse the environment,
which was at risk.

                                      188
               The Law of One, Book IV, Session 103

Questioner: Is the reason for this lack of protection the fact that it has been
a considerable time since we have worked in here?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: What is the reason?
Ra: I am Ra. The lack of regular repetition of the so-called Banishing Ritual
is the lack of which we spoke.
Questioner: From this I assume that it would be most appropriate to
perform the Banishing Ritual daily in this room. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. That is acceptable.
Questioner: I don’t want to overtire the instrument. We’re running close to
time here. I will just ask if there is anything that we can do to improve the
contact or to make the instrument more comfortable, and anything else that
Ra could state at this time that would aid us?
Ra: I am Ra. We find the alignments quite fastidiously observed. You are
conscientious. Continue in support, one for the other, and find the praise
and thanksgiving that harmony produces. Rest your cares and be merry.
I am Ra. I leave you, glorying in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and in the peace of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      189
                      Note To Our Readers
As we look back over the material in Volume Four, we find the following
statement by Ra from Session #97 to be the key for this beginning of the
study of the archetypical mind.
“We wish not to form that which may be considered by any
mind/body/spirit complex to be a complete and infallible series of images.
There is a substantial point to be made in this regard. We have been, with
the questioner’s aid, investigating the concept complexes of the great
architecture of the archetypical mind. To more clearly grasp the nature, the
process, and the purpose of archetypes, Ra provided a series of concept
complexes. In no way whatsoever should we, as humble messengers of the
One Infinite Creator, wish to place before the consideration of any
mind/body/spirit complex, which seeks its evolution, the palest tint of the
idea that these images are anything but a resource for working in the area of
the development of the faith and the will.
To put this into perspective we must gaze then at the stunning mystery of
the One Infinite Creator. The archetypical mind does not resolve any
paradoxes or bring all into unity. This is not the property of any source
which is of the third density. Therefore, may we ask the student to look up
from inward working and behold the glory, the might, the majesty, the
mystery, and the peace of oneness. Let no consideration of bird or beast,
darkness or light, shape or shadow keep any which seeks from the central
consideration of unity.
We are not messengers of the complex. We bring the message of unity. In
this perspective only may we affirm the value to the seeker of adepthood of
the grasping, articulating, and use of this resource of the deep mind
exemplified by the concept Complex of the archetypes.


                                Epilogue
After 106 sessions the Ra contact ended with Don Elkin’s death on
November 7, 1984, after a year of declining health. It was the harmony
between the three of us that supported the Ra contact, thus we no longer
work with Ra nor the trance state but now channel other Confederation
sources. If you are interested in our other books or tapes, we will be happy
to send you information about them. Write: L/L Research, P.O. Box 5195,
Louisville, KY 40255-0195.


                                     190
               A Note About the Tarot Cards
The original deck that Don Elkins used for questioning was the work of
C.C. Zain, founder of the Church of Light.
C.C. Zain’s first deck was released in 1918. It was subsequently revised in
the 1930’s, and issued as a monochrome deck in the 1960’s. It is the 1960’s
deck that Don, Jim, and Carla used for questioning Ra about the archetypal
mind. That deck is listed as the “BOL II” design on this website
http://green-door.narod.ru/zaintarot.html.
In the following pages of this PDF, the first seven arcana in the series were
those re-drawn by L/L Research according to Ra’s responses in Book IV.
Because L/L Research did not receive permission to publish the tarot images
from the Church of Light deck, the remaining images, Arcana 8 – 22, come
from a very similar deck made by George Fathman. More information
about the Fathman deck is available here: http://green-door.narod.ru/jdeq-
tarot.html




                                     191
The Major Arcana




 Matrix of the Mind
    The Magician
   Arcanum No. I




        192
  The Major Arcana




Potentiator of the Mind
   The High Priestess
    Arcanum No. II




          193
The Major Arcana




Catalyst of the Mind
    The Empress
  Arcanum No. III




        194
 The Major Arcana




Experience of the Mind
     The Emperor
   Arcanum No. IV




         195
  The Major Arcana




Significator of the Mind
    The Hierophant
    Arcanum No. V




          196
    The Major Arcana




Transformation of the Mind
 The Lovers or Two Paths
      Arcanum No. VI




           197
 The Major Arcana




Great Way of the Mind
     The Chariot
   Arcanum No. VII




         198
The Major Arcana




Matrix of the Body
Justice or Balance
 Arcanum No. VIII




       199
  The Major Arcana




Potentiator of the Body
  Wisdom or The Sage
    Arcanum No. IX




          200
The Major Arcana




Catalyst of the Body
 Wheel of Fortune
   Arcanum No. X




        201
 The Major Arcana




Experience of the Body
   The Enchantress
   Arcanum No. XI




         202
   The Major Arcana




 Significator of the Body
The Hanged Man or Martyr
     Arcanum No. XII




           203
    The Major Arcana




Transformation of the Body
          Death
     Arcanum No. XIII




           204
 The Major Arcana




Great Way of the Body
    The Alchemist
  Arcanum No. XIV




         205
The Major Arcana




Matrix of the Spirit
     The Devil
  Arcanum No. XV




        206
  The Major Arcana




Potentiator of the Spirit
Lightning Struck Tower
    Arcanum No. XVI




          207
 The Major Arcana




Catalyst of the Spirit
  The Star or Hope
  Arcanum No. XVII




         208
  The Major Arcana




Experience of the Spirit
      The Moon
  Arcanum No. XVIII




          209
  The Major Arcana




Significator of the Spirit
        The Sun
    Arcanum No. XIX




           210
    The Major Arcana




Transformation of the Spirit
         Judgment
      Arcanum No. XX




            211
  The Major Arcana




Great Way of the Spirit
      The World
   Arcanum No. XXI




          212
The Major Arcana




   The Choice
    The Fool
Arcanum No. XXII




      213
