
''>1..' " ,
It
Also by Israel Regardie
A GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES
"The two main methods of the traditional and esoteric Qabalah are
Meditation (Yoga) and Practical Qabalah (Magick). By Yoga is meant
that rigorous system of mental and self discipline which has as its primary
aim the absolute and complete control of~e thinking principle, theRuach,
the ultimate object being to obtain the faculty with which to still the stream
of thought at will, so that that which is behind (as it were), or above, or
beyond the mind can manifest on to tlJe stillness thus produced The
quiescence of the mental turbulence is the primary essential. With this
faculty at command, the student is taught to exalt the mind by various
technical methods of Magick until it overrides the normal limitations and
barriers of its nature, ascending ina tremendous unquenchable column of
fire-like ecstasy to the Universal Consciousness, with which it becomes
united Once having become at one with transcendental Existence, it
intuitively partakes of universal knowledge, which is considered to be a
more reliable source of information than the rational introspection of the
intellect or the experimental scientific investigation of matter can give."
In this unique textbook we have one of the fmest and most lucid
introductions to the study of Qabalah available. Written when Regardie
was only twenty-four years old, it served him as a yardstick against which
he could measure his own progress. It is comprised of his own notes,
combining the works of Aleister Crowley, A.E. Waite, Eliphas Levi and
D.H. Lawrence. The many diagrams and tables of definitions and
correspondences are designed to simplify the studenfs grasp of the
complex system and provide a guide to Qabalistic symbolism.
This book further provides an introduction to the Qabalistic foundation of
the Golden Dawn and the practices of Magick and meditation in the
Western Esoteric system. For.centuries the mystical' Qabalah has been
used by Jews, Christians, Arabs and others as a guide to understanding the
Universe and our place within it Hundreds of magicians and mystics have
considered the Qabalah to be the most efficient plan ever devised for
classifying and organizing the characteristics of the Cosmos and the self.
ISBN 0-87542-690-5, Second Edition, Revised, 5th printing. US $6.95
Integration of the human personality is vital to the
continuance of creative life. Without it, man li:ves as an
outsider to his own behavior. By combining magic and
psychology, Israel Regardie has created a system
whereby one can make full use of all being potentials,
drawing nearer the goal of both psychology and
magic-and that of life itself.
The integration process brings into balance opposing
elements of the psyche. The Middle Pillar Ritual is ideal
for this as the middle pillar itself is integration: it is the
point of eqUilibrium between the two outer pillars of
the Tree of Life, the extremes or polarities of all things.
It holds within it the essence of the polarities-their
potential for existence-while its stance is one of
dynamic balance, allowing full expression of man's
en tire being. Learn to:
• understand the psyche through its correspondences
on the Tree of Life
• expand self-awareness, thereby intensifying the
inner growth process
• activate creative and intuitive potentials
• widen the field of vision of the conscious ego to
embrace the divinity within, unfolding a new
sphere of spiritual perception
• understand the individual thought-patterns which
control every facet of personal behavior.

THE
MIDDLE
PILLAR
• • • •
• • •
• •
•
By the same author:
A Garden of Pomegranates
The Tree of Life
My Rosicrucian Adventure
The Art of True Healing
The Philosopher's Stone
The Golden Dawn
The Romance of Metaphysics
The Art and Meaning of Magic
Be Yourself, the Art of Relaxation
Roll Away the Stone
New Wings for Daedalus
Twelve Steps to Spiritual Enlightenment
The Eye in the Triangle
The Legend of Aleister Crowley
(with P. R. Stephensen)
THE
MIDDLE
PILLAR
By
ISRAEL REGARDIE
A CO-RELATION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF
ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY AND THE
ELEMENTARY TECHNIQUES OF MAGIC
1987
llewellyn Publications
St. Paul, Minnesota, 55164-0383, U.S.A.
Copyright c 1970
by llewellyn Publications
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either in part or in whole,
may be reproduced, transmitted or utilized in any form or by any
means, electronic, photographic or mechanical, including photo-
copying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the Publisher, except
for brief quotations embodied in literary articles and reviews.
For permissions, or for serialization, condensation, or for adap-
tations, write the Publisher at the address below.
International Standard Book Number: 0-87542-658-1
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 72-19899
Copyright c 1938 by Israel Regardie
Copyright c 1945 by The Aries Press
Second Edition, revised and enlarged, 1970
First Printing, 1973
Second Printing, 1978
Third Printing, 1985
Fourth Printing, 1986
Fifth Printing, 1987
Cover Art: Marjory Paskaruk
Produced by Uewellyn Publications
Typography and Art property of Chester-Kent, Inc.
Published by
LLEWELLYN PUBUCATIONS
A Division of Chester-Kent, Inc.
P.O. Box 64383
St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
Printed in the United States of America
DEDICATED
to the
revered memories
of
WILLIAM WYNN WESTCO'IT
and
S. L. MACGREGOR MATHERS

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDmON
The world is in crisis. Men of all ages look in despair
on the chaos which is their inheritance from countless
generations of forebears, and join in what has become a
universal cry of disillusionment: "Stop the world-I
want to get off."
Unfortunately, it isn't that easy to get off. Answers
are not as simple as some might have supposed. And
assuming they were, where would people go, once they
got off the merry-go-round? Many centuries ago, certain
sages approached the problem from another angle, and
found what they considered a practical solution. If life
is sorrow, then the only thing to do is to end this
sorrowful existence by getting off the perpetually
revolving wheel of · existence. Life follows life,
incarnation follows incarnation-and all of them spell
anXiety and sorrow. For these sages, it was apparent
that it might be millions of years before the masses of
humanity would develop enough insight to be able to
tenninate the sorrowful cycle of existence. But for the
illUminated individual who will apply himself to a
i
specific psycho-spiritual discipline, escape might come
aeons sooner than for the average member of mankind.
This release, they learned, comes only through the
achievement of a higher consciousness by the individual.
Call it cosmic consciousness, the mystical experience,
communion with God-all spell the same
message-release. None may know it for another. Each
man must himself attain for himself awareness of his
own oneness with Infinite Life-the consciousness that a
state of separateness exists only within his own mind.
Not until man does recognize that he is himself a
microcosm of the macrocosm, a reflection of the
universe, a world within himself, ruled and governed by
his own divinity, can he escape from the wheel. It is the
achievement of this one realization which all schools of
mysticism, magic and various forms of occult teaching
refer to as The Great Work.
The Great Work is not accomplished overnight, or
even in one lifetime. But the sooner the aspirant
undertakes the task, the sooner will it be finished, and
the quicker will he be released from the cycle of
necessity, the wheel of evolution to which common
humanity is bound. Millions of years may pass in the
normal process of evolution before the mass of mankind
will reach the state of freedom which those few
individuals who apply themselves to this Work can
accomplish in a fraction of the time. And the paradox
then dawns upon them that life. instead of being
sorrowful, may just as well be the opposite. "Remember
all ye that existence is pure joy; that all the sorrows are
ii
but as shadows; they pass and are done; but there is that
which remains." And as it has also been written: "I am
divided for love's sake, for the chance of union. This is
the creation of the world, that the pain of division is as
nothing, and the joy of dissolution all."
Herein lies the value of Magic. Under ordinary
conditions, months may be required for the flowering of
a plant, but the use of a hot-house will produce identical
results within a few weeks. An understanding and
application of Magic can telescope the time required for
man to acquire the realization of his own divinity. Then,
once he has become aware of the existence of his higher
Self, and works in cooperation rather than oppositon to
It, once he looks to It for guidance and direction,
thenceforth regarding his ego as a tool, sharpened and
polished to be employed now to fulfIl the divine plan
rather than in the indulgence of his own petty
purposes-then will his way become easier. Long before
obtaining his final release, then may he move forward
on the upward path with joy and equanimity.
So it is that, at a time when the planet seems to be
rocking beneath our feet, I derive great pleasure from
writing an introduction to a new edition of The Middle
Pillar. It is that pillar which stands dependable and
relatively changeless as the sphinx, between the
extremes of Mercy and Severity, the two outer pillars of
the Qabalah's Tree of Life. Equally important, it also
provides basic principles of Magic which can speed the
student on his way to blessed release from the necessity
of the accursed wheel. Once he has gained this new
iii
understanding, the student, it is to be hoped, will
gradually but steadily progress until he has completed
the Great Work. In so doing, not only will he help
himself by stepping up his own evolutionary processes,
but to that degree will he have raised the frequencies of
his fellow-man and even the planet itself, since all that
is, is One.
Frances G. Wickes in The Inner World of Choice
points out that we must "accept the experience that will
bring to birth a latent potential", and be willing to dare
the leap into the unknown, diving deep into the
unconscious "in search of the other unborn or lost
potentials of the self."
The Middle Pillar should prove a trustworthy guide
on this search. It involves several distinct methods, each
of which has been designed for a specific purpose, yet all
work together to accomplish the ultimate goal, to erase
the barrier between the conscious self and the
Unconscious, and to enable the student to find within
the self, the Great Self who is in reality the only Saviour
he will ever have.
The use of the Qabalistic Cross, as described in an
early chapter, serves as an ideal means of aiding the ego
to undergo an enormous expansion, to open up
consciousness on a voluntary ordered level to the
dictates of the Unconscious. The so-called Banishing
Ritual of the Pentagram is a vital technique designed to
eliminate undesirable elements from the psychic sphere,
and thus to permit the process of
consciousness-expansion to proceed without harm or
iv
hindrance. The use of the archaic exercise referred to as
the Middle Pillar will increase the field of attention, aid
in the achievement of balance and equilibrium, and
unfold to the aspirant a completely new and remarkable
sphere of power and spiritual perception.
Every technique of Magic is intended in various ways
to widen the field of vision of the conscious ego to the
deeper, more spiritual aspects of the divine
nature-which, in reality, is his true or higher Self. Of
the numerous techniques available in the vast
armamentarium of Magic for this purpose, the most vital
and essential ones are summed up in the simple exercises
outlined in this book.
Ceremonial magic enables man to become an engine
capable of harnessing and directing the enormous power
that lies within. A multitude of basic principles are
utilized to this end. Adoration, which is essential to
attaining a sense of unity with Godhead, concentration,
development of will and the use of it to accomplish a
given purpose, achievement of self-awareness, and the
ability to breathe properly, these are but a few of the
benefits to be derived from persistent application to the
basic practices herein discussed.
Various symbolisms are employed in those phases
which deal with Adoration, but the choice of symbols is
actually unimportant. Once it is realized that basically
all religions are one and all prophets are true, it is quite
logical to borrow any set of symbols from one religion
for a certain purpose, and another set from a second
religion for a different purpose. Nor will the practices be
v
of passing value. On the contrary, the set of adorations
the student will learn from this book are to be
integrated for all time into the daily pattern of living.
Next in importance is the achievement of a
heightened sense of self-awareness. All other exercises
and complex procedures actually begin from this
heightening of self-awareness. To the degree that the
horizon of one's self becomes expanded, to that extent
does the self become enlarged.
The development of proper breathing habits will serve
many purposes, including eradication of considerable
neuromuscular tension, with a consequent increase of
energy and vitality. The air by which we are surrounded,
and in which we live and move and have our being, is
the essence of life itself. Consequently we live, literally
surrounded by a circumambient sea of energy and
vitality-a divine force which can be assimilated by the
simple process of learning to breathe in a proper
rhythm, altogether apart from more abstruse occult
theories.
Once he has gained control over his mental processes,
the student can then learn to stimulate and direct his
emotions. This becomes Will. So complete and
interlocking are the details of this system, that the
emotions can then be utilized as a tool to be used in
directing and holding the mind steady on a given
objective. For fervor and conviction are essential to
activating the productive and creative agency within
man.
In the process, over a period of time, life becomes
vi
consecrated so that all one's energies become
automatically concentrated in a continuous devotion to
God or the one Life that courses through all of us. In
short, the student achieves a perfect and harmonious
identification with divine power, life and love. And then
he will know that "existence is pure joy; that all the
sorrows are but as shadows; they pass and are
done .... "
The Middle Pillar was originally dedicated to S. L.
McGregor Mathers and Dr. William Wynn Westcott who
were chiefs of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn,
to which lowe so very much. The book is merely the
simplest possible representation of some of the
elementary practices of that Order. In actuality, it is an
attempt to simplify and combine the practices both of
the Golden Dawn with the insights and later
developments of Aleister Crowley.
The real virtue of the book lies in its correlation of
the practice of Magic to modern psychotherapy. For
Magic places the achievement of self-awareness second
in importance only to the achievement of unity with
God. And lung's defmition of psychotherapy was that
which enabled one to become conscious of what
hitherto was unconscious.
For untold thousands of years, man has lived in
su bj uga tion to the unconscious forces of
Nature-powerful instincts and drives which led him to
act without deliberation or conscious volition, and in
complete ignorance in fact of the forces at work which
really motivated him. The Great Work recognizes that in
vii
these deep unconscious levels lies a great storehouse of
power, awareness and vitality which must not only be
awakened but recognized and equilibrated for the
human being to function at maximum capacity and
efficiency. This in short is the major purpose and
function of the teachings of this book.
I had fIrSt begun to read about psychoanalysis in the
writings of Freud and Jung as early as 1926. I cannot
say they meant very much to me, save as intellectual
stimuli of a fascinating kind. When I first wrote The
Middle Pillar, I had just entered psychoanalytical
therapy, thanks to the influence of a very dear friend.
The tremendous value and importance of psychotherapy
as a prelude to any serious magical training was just
beginning to dawn upon me.
My work with Dr. E. A. Qegg of Harley Street, and
with Dr. J. L. Bendit, a Jungian of Wimpole Street in
London, led me to realize the importance of
psychotherapy to the beginner in mysticism and magic.
In fact, thirty-five years later, in 1968, I am more
strongly of the opinion than I was then. So fervently do
I feel about this that since that time I have acquired
some of the qualifications necessary to practice various
forms of psychotherapy, particularly that of Wilhelm
Reich, whose work I regard as a bridge between
conventional psychotherapy and occultism. I doubt if
Reich would be pleased to learn of this association of
mine-but a fact it is nevertheless.
Today I will not so much as consider even discussion
of the Great Work with a student until he has
viii
experienced some form of psychotherapy, I care not
which. There is lacking, until then, a common frame of
reference, and common medium of communication. In
The Middle Pillar will be discovered the first
glimmerings of insight I had in that particular direction.
It still holds good today.
ix

"The Wisdom of Enlightenment is inherent
in everyone of us. It is because of the delu-
sion under which our mind works that we
fail to realise it ourselves, and that we have
to seek the advice and guidance 0/ the
highly enlightened one before we can
know our essence of mind. You should
know that so far as Buddha-nature is
concerned, there is no difference between
an enlighte1z,ed man and an ignorant one.
What makes the difference is that one
realises it, while the other is kept in
ignorance 0/ it."
SUTRA OF WEI LANG

FOREWORD
This book was completed in February 1936,
anterior to the writing of The Art of True Healing,
whilst I was still resident in London. My point of
view since that time has undergone considerable
revision, mostly by way of extension. I could easily
have altered the text to conform to my present
thinking on such matters as the importance of the
art of Relaxation in relation to the welfare both
of body and mind. But I have refrained from doing
so since such alteration would interfere with the
integrity and continuity of the book as an expres-
sion of myself at that time.
For me The Middle Pillar marks a certain stage
of psychological development. I prefer not to tam-
per with temporal markings and inner milestones.
Such a stage may correspond with that of other
people who may thus find it of no little value, I
hope, to themselves. Possibly in the near future I
may dilate at greater length and freedom upon the
important implications of Relaxation and Psycho-
logical Analysis insofar as they have bearing upon
spiritual development and unfoldment.
January 3ISt, I938
New York City
ISRAEL REGARDIE

CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE
CHAPTER Two
PAGE
13
4S
CHAPTER THREE •••••••..••••••••••••••••• 79
CHAPTER FOUR •.••••..••••••••••••••••••• 109
CHAPTER FIVE •••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 131

CHAPTER ONE
fi'iiO ME one of the most significant and extra-
D ordinary characteristics of modern thought
is the widespread circulation of books on
psychology in its various branches. There is a gen-
eral interest in matters dealing with the mind-
especially with that aspect of the hinterland of the
mind which has been named the Unconscious for
want of better words and also because its realm at
the moment is so ambiguous to us. :There could
hardly be an educated individual who has not some
slight degree of acquaintance with this analytical
psychology. Even if this familiarity ran only to an
acquaintance with several of the more commonly
employed cliches - such as libido, the unconscious,
conflicts and resistances, neuroses and complexes
- that in itself would be indicative of a phenome-
non which surely has occurred seldom before in the
history of civilised thought. .
To meet this widespread interest in matters psy-
13
chological, a number of books have been written
to give the general reader some notion of that pecu-
liar world with which it is the province of the ana-
lyst to deal. Quite a number of these are extremely
informative, providing a very sane and balanced
view of the subject. On the other hand, as is inev-
itable, there is a large number which might just
as well have remained unwritten. One of the most
curious misconceptions promulgated by some of
these latter is the fact that analytical psychology
- and here I use this term in its widest sense to
cover the various schools inaugurated by Freud,
Jung, Adler, etc.- is a thing quite apart, and that
the one thing which stamped our ancestors as bar-
barians and savages was their utter lack of acquain-
tance with psycho-therapy. It would be totally
absurd for anyone to minimise all that has been
achieved by modern psychology, due to the efforts
of such astute investigators as Freud and Jung.
But it is abundantly clear that their protagonists
- phychological extremists - go entirely too far
in disclaiming the intelligence and insight of our
predecessors. For the facts are, as but little research
indicates, that so far from being ignorant of ana-
Iyticai psychology, the ancients, and particularly
those of the East and hither East, had evolved a
highly complex and elaborate scheme not only of
analysis, but also of spiritual development and
synthesis.
Some orthodox die-hards may question the rela-
14-
tionship of modern psychology with discredited
oriental and archaic techniques for the unfolding
of man's higher or spiritual nature. In practice,
however, such a relationship does indubitably exist.
It is a fact of clinical and consulting-room experi-
ence. For, during the course of a protracted anal-
ysis, the cruder and more superficial unconscious
levels having been uncovered and moral conflicts
resolved, symbols and theme-motifs of a religious
or spiritual nature do make their entry across the
threshold of consciousness. This entry is by way
of dream, intuition, and by direct apprehension.
Not only is this so, but they exert a potent influence
on the entire personality, producing integrity, a
new and more equilibrated attitude towards life,
and an unification of the various strata of con-
sciousness which collectively we call man.
What modern psychology has quite possibly
accomplished is an advance over the efforts of our
predecessors in the way of a cathartie technique.
Moreover, because of modern devices, the methods
of analytical psychology have been brought nearer
to the understanding and convenience of the ordi-
nary man of the street. In the past, the techniques
of attainment, Mysticism, Magic, and Yoga, or by
whatever name such systems were denoted, were
always several removes from the ken of the average
individual.
The psychologies of the past may be summarised
by the use of the words Yoga and Magic. The sub-
IS
ject of Yoga has already been excellently dealt with
by several able and competent writers, requiring
therefore but little mention here. Such a book as
Yoga and Western Psychology by Geraldine Coster
must certainly take its place historically as a gen-
uine and first-rate contribution to the progress of
analytical psychology. There is also the compilation
of the Buddhist Lodge Concentration and M edita-
tion, a handbook on that subject of great merit.
A number of modern psychologists have also exam-
ined the subject of Yoga and meditation as a whole,
and have found much that is sympathetic to and
explanatory of their own systems. And further-
more, the mystical systems posit a goal and a gen-
eral schema which expand the rather hazy and
indeterminate character of a very large part of our
psycho-therapeutic systems.
Analytical Psychology and Magic comprise in
my estimation two halves or aspects of a single
technical system. Just as the body and mind are
not two separate units, but are simply the dual
manifestations of an interior dynamic "something"
so psychology and Magic comprise similarly a single
system whose goal is the integration of the human
personality. Its aim is to unify the different depart-
ments and functions of man's being, to bring into
operation those which previously for various rea-
sons were latent. Incidentally, its technique is such
that neurotic symptoms which were too insistent
16
upon expression either become eliminated or toned
down by a process of equilibration.
It will be obvious, then, that by Magic we are
not considering a theatrical craft or jugglery-
and certainly not that mediaeval superstition which
was the child of ignorance begotten by fear and ter-
ror. These definitions should be expunged from our
thinking. For centuries Magic has been quite erro-
neously associated with such pathologies as witch-
craft and demonolatry due to the duplicity of char-
latans and the reticence of its own so-called author-
ities. Even today, the custodians of this knowledge,
harassed by personal problems and more especially
by their own power complex are still adamant in
their traditional refusal to circulate a more accurate
description of the nature of Magic. Possibly even
they have lost all understanding of its principles.
No wonder is it that misconception exists. With the
exception of very few works which have attracted
the attention of but a fractional part of the reading
public, little has been written to act as a definitive
exposition of what Magic really is. Inasmuch as
something of the nature of modem Psychology is
at least partially understood by a fair section of
the educated world, were it said that Magic is akin
to and concerns itself with that same subjective
realm of psychology, some notion of its character
and objectives come within hailing distance.
So far as the average man or aspirant to Magic
is concerned, unquestionably the analytic tech-
17
nique should comprise the first stage of the routine
employed in spiritual development. For until one
understands himself according to that peculiarly
penetrating light which Psychology has thrown
upon our motives, he cannot hope to bring effec-
tively into operation the dormant side of his nature.
And lest anyone casually dismiss this desirable self-
knowledge as a goal easily attained to or, it may be,
already obtained, one can only utter a solemn
warning that this is not so simple as at first sight
seems. That self-knowledge is necessary to the pur-
suit of Magic is self-evident. At once we are faced
at the portal by guardians armed to the teeth. Such
queries confront us as: suppose the interest in spirit-
ual culture were motivated by a desire to escape
from the turbulence of physical life? What if one's
stubbornly defended point of view were only an
elaborate rationalisation to conceal the sense of in-
security, the dull but insistent ache of inferiority?
These are quite often the unrecognised factors
which compel refuge in the religious avocation-
even in various branches of science too. The search
for, and quite often assumed discovery of some
paternal-like God or a testy senior after the fashion
of Jehovah, frequently has its origins in an adoles-
cent rejection of the father. This, deliberately for-
gotten, has become so deep, that the inner psychic
necessity for the authority and affection of the
father is unconsciously projected outwards into a
terrifying and awe-inspiring deity. Discernment of
18
the true motives of conduct and attitude towards
life is, therefore, an absolute essential. This accom-
plished, then may be examined that other side of
the medallion which is man's own psyche.
As a practical system, Magic is concerned not so
much with analysis as with bringing into operation
the creative and intuitive parts of man. A psycho-
logical technique can never be a wholly integrative
one until it accepts this spiritual side of man and
assists the analysand in the recognition of or ac-
quaintance with its activity. At this moment, the
treatment of these matters remains almost entirely
within the domain of Magic alone. Fully does it
recognise the necessity for integration. Not only
does it accept and recommend the results of analy-
sis, but it proceeds still further. If analysis aims at
the acceptance of the Unconscious, and the validity
of its co-existence with consciousness, then Magic
may be said to be a technique for realising the
deeper levels of the Unconscious. These are levels
of power and reali~ation wht;se value we can but
dimly grasp through contemplation of religious
figures of the past. Buddha, Jesus, Krishna, St.
Francis, and a host of others are instances of such
illuminated men-of individuals who have striven,
all in different ways, to know themselves and at-
tain to a realisation of their true divine nature. If
so we wish the techniques they employed we may
call devotion, meditation, contemplation. Funda-
mentally, however, they are identical in spirit
19
with what we now propose to discuss as Magic. In
the latter, however, the entire process of attain-
ment has been systematised and developed almost
into an exact science, having as its foundation the
discovery of Godhead. While there may be very
few in life who can attain to the full realisation of
their divine origin and nature, yet for all of us there
is some value to Magic, some degree of fulfilment
or attainment available. There is none so small as
cannot employ it to some good and noble end.
None so great as cannot better himself morally and
otherwise, thus rendering himself more efficient to
cope with and understand life and the world both
about and within him. These are objectives which,
notwithstanding the magnitudes of their vision,
are within the reach of every man.
§
It is not yet the moment to enter into a disquisi-
tion on the intricacies of magical ritual. But in or-
der to expound fundamental psychological and
spiritual principles it is necessary to refer to what
are known technically as the Two Pillars. Half-way
between the East and West, and North and South,
in a properly instituted Temple are placed two up-
right pillars. One of these is coloured white, the
other black. These pieces of lodge furniture are
emblematical of the two opposites functioning in
20
the diverse operations of nature. Just as the Tem-
ple represents in miniature the whole of life by
which we may ever be confronted, or, rather, the
manifold parts of our own inner nature, so these
two pillars symbolise some aspect of these phe~
nomena. They represent light and darkness, heat
and cold. In man, they stand for love and hate, joy
and pain, mind and emotion, life and death, sleep-
ing and waking. Every pair of opposites conceiv-
able to the human mind find their representation
in the implication of these two pillars.
Now one of the most important ideas communi-
cated to the student of Magic, in his ceremonial
initiation when he is led from one station to another,
is that an extreme leaning either to one or the other
of the opposites is a very dangerous thing. It is un-
wise to swing to opposite poles of life's pendulum.
"Unbalanced power is the ebbing away of life. Un-
balanced mercy is but weakness and the fading out
of the will. Unbalanced severity is cruelty and the
barrenness of mind."
Were we to change the terminology of the
speech, instead of the word 'Mercy' we might sub-
stitute 'emotion', or 'generosity' or 'love'; for 'Se-
verity' we may substitute 'power', 'the rational side
of us', or 'justice' or 'tyranny'. Either of these qual-
ities when carried to an extreme, unmodified by the
other, is conducive to an unhealthy state of psyche.
Thus it is, that in so religiously authoritative a
book as the Bhagavad-Gita, which some consider
21
one of the finest pieces of devotional and philo-
sophical literature yet penned, we find it stated
"Be free from the pairs of opposites."
The whole of life - it is in fact the law of Nature
itself - seems to be dominated by these extremes
or opposites. "Two contending forces and one
which unites them eternally. Two basal angles of
the triangle and one which forms the apex. Such is
the origin of creation; it is the Triad of Life." Only
a little reflection will convince the reader of the
truth of this theorem. Until we have acquired
wisdom and understanding, we swing during the
seventy year span of our lives between self-esteem
and self-disgust, from an exaggerated estimation of
our fellows to their utter and final condemnation.
Age, it is true, does bring moderation and temper-
ance with it. But were this more balanced attitude
towards life cultivated, taught or adopted earlier
or before middle age set in, how much more ef-
ficient could we not be, and what could we not
achieve? The technique under consideration con-
sists primarily in the conscious reconciliation of
opposing forces. It is this which has been called the
development of the Golden Flower.
Before proceeding further, it is a very interesting
piece of speculation to consider the trinities of vari-
ous religions. Most of them resolve themselves when
all theological argument and intellectual quibbling
are eliminated, into some such relationship as
Father, Mother and Son. Osiris, Isis and Horus are
22
an excellent example. This is true also of the Chris-
tian system where, upon careful consideration we
find the Holy Ghost defined as a feminine aspect of
godhead. And in the Hebrew Qabalah we have the
Trinity on the Tree of Life of CHESED Mercy,
GEVURAH Might and TIPHARAS Equilibrium
or Beauty. Co-relating this latter triad with tradi-
tional symbolism, CHESED is masculine, referred
to Jupiter, a paternal wisdom symbol. GEVURAH,
feminine, is attributed to Mars, indicative of great
power. One alchemical aphorism expresses this
duality in the words "Man is peace and woman
is power." Bearing all these in mind, we con-
clude that as CHESED represents the Father and
GEVURAH the Mother, so TIPHARAS which is
Beauty, is the reconciler between them. Interest-
ingly enough, TIPHARAS is referred to the Sun,
and corresponds to the third member of the theo-
logical trinity, the Son.
Looking at these trinities as so many expressions
of psychological fact - that is, as previously de-
fined, as factors active within the psyche itself-
we are struck by the similarity of the religious
point of view with the idea of the Middle Way. It
is the pursuit of this middle path which leads to
self-conquest and the steady growth of the Golden
Flower, the wakening of the imprisoned soul within.
The Father and Mother may be said to corre-
spond to the two Pillars of the Temple, to the two
extremes or opposites. In this sense they are the
23
tendencies exhibited by all the phenomena of Na-
ture. They are the extremes of spirit and matter,
love and hate, life and death, ebb and flow, systole
and diastole. Nature itself is the embodiment of
the two extremes, the two opposites of the Trinity.
Man, unenlightened man, one in whom neither wis-
dom nor understanding has been brought to birth,
likewise fashions his life in the way of these two
extremes. Or rather, these extremes fashion his life
for him. For he is, as though by compulsion, driven
by some external force he knows not of, between
the poles of extreme love and hate, swinging from
kindness and maudlin generosity to bursts of un-
controlled anger, hate and meanness. His actions,
almost without a single exception, are so many
semi-hysterical flights from pole to pole of his emo-
tions. He is, as it were, under the dominion of the
Father and the Mother.
To the student of the psyche, to the one who
seeks wisdom and the knowledge of his higher Self,
the counsel has always been given to avoid the
opposites. His task is to refrain from the compul-
sion of extreme actions.
In certain schools of Magic, where the rites of
initiation were celebrated by Adepts who at one
time thoroughly understood the technique they
employed, initiation ceremonies depicted the burial
of the higher Self and its rebirth by means of a
technical system of Magic and Meditation. Therein,
the higher Self was always represented by some
z4
sacred figure of the major religions - a man who
was nearly always shown as the Son of God. The
essence of the ethical injunctions of these systems
was to develop the Son within. "Unless Christ be
born in you •.. " "Look within; thou are Buddha."
I do not believe these images could possibly have
reference to any historical individual we know of.
But rather I surmise these refer to the gradual
bringing into conscious operation of a spiritual
point of view, of an equilibrated attitude towards
life, an attitude not exclusively directed to any
extreme. Recognising the polarity of life, such a
point of view sought to steer a middle way between
the tortuous and extreme activity of Nature. It is
the way of the Reconciler, of keeping to the path
between the two Pillars, that balanced and har-
monious position in which the candidates of the
ancient initiation systems found themselves at the
major crisis and climax of their initiation. This is
the technique of bringing to birth the golden Sun
of TIPHARAS, the Sun of beauty and harmony
who is the third person of the trinity. Thus it is that
one system nowadays conceives of the Great Work
as partaking of the recognition of the Crowned and
Conquering Child Horus - he who, while partak-
ing necessarily of the nature of both the Father and
the Mother, is simultaneously an entirely different
and unique being. Through the result of the union
of opposing forces, his nature tends to a new view-
point in the conquest of life. For the Father and
25
Mother are "those forces whose reconciliation is
the key of life."
To illustrate in another way the import of this
concept, let us describe it from a practical and
physical point of view. One of the major incon-
veniences which afHicts a large portion of mankind
is constipation. In many instances of this disorder,
no organic disturbance exists at all; the trouble
being principally a functional one. (Though it
must be here interpolated that even if it were or-
ganic, there is sufficient psychological evidence to
indicate that this likewise may ensue from an iden-
tical series of causes.) Very often, this malady does
not respond to any kind of medical treatment. It is
not uncommon for patients to testify that they
have been recommended massage, surgical opera-
tions, drugs, nature cure and all the other types of
cures. In spite of these the illness persists un-
changed. Enquiry elicits that there is, frequently,
a conscious conflict between two courses of cOn-
duct. More often than not, however, the real seat
of the conflict is not in consciousness at all, but
exists in a far deeper level of mind, in the Uncon-
scious. It was probably around puberty that an
already existent conflict developed such acuteness
and severity as to require for the psychic safety of
the ego to be repressed completely out of sight.
From this, we might conclude - and there is
some psychological evidence to this end - that the
conflict is one between the instincts and social dic-
26
tates. That is, because of parental training there is
a blind refusal to recognise the necessity for the
proper and legitimate expression of the instincts.
It is a denial of one side of the personality, a denial
without justification or reason. It is as though,
while admiring the beauty and form of the lotus,
we wished not to be reminded of the slimy source
where grow the roots of the plant, and therefore
cut the stalk right through, severing the flower
from its necessary root. This cutting of the lotus
stalk has its counterpart in human minds, many
of us having been cut off from our roots. For this
denial of the instinctual life, in which the conscious
existence after all has its roots, and this persistent
repression, cause some degree of dissociation. That
is, a severance of the integrity and unity of the
psyche. The psychosis, if sufficiently intense and
prolonged, produces symptoms of various sorts
ranging from lack of vitality, irritability, constipa-
tion, and a host of other physical and nervous
disorders.
With such a problem, there is but one logical
method of attack. It is to recognise quite clearly
that the physical symptoms are the results of an
internal conflict, a conflict between the needs of the
body and the self-sufficiency or cowardice of the
mind. It is a conflict between the necessity to the
expression of emotion and feeling, and the imperi-
ous urge of the ego to escape from a vulnerable
constituent of its nature, that principle which at
27
one time had been susceptible to hurt and injury.
With the frank recognition of the conflict, one
should endeavour to recollect the events of his
early childhood, bringing up as many memories as
possible of that period, experiencing neither shame
nor remorse at his discoveries. Confronting these
memories with the knowledge that as an adult in
whom is the light of reason, he understands that
his mature mind can dissipate the infantile emotion
connected with early experiences, in which shame
or inferiority or insecurity was felt. In this way, he
links and applies mind to emotion, thus avoiding
within him the uncontrolled play of the opposites.
Their existence is neither denied nor frustrated.
This is a vital point to be understood. No denial
or rejection should be countenanced of what mani-
festly is an actual fact, no stubborn refusal to
admit and accept a part of his own nature. As we
have seen, the denial of any function of the self
leads to dissociation, and the latter results in ner-
vous and physical disorders.
Face the fact that at one time there was a denial
of one phase of life, and thus accept the conflict.
Accept it, knowing that so long as we remain
human, these conflicts are bound to be our lot. In
our present stage of evolution, they are part and
parcel of human nature, and so cannot be avoided.
But what can be eliminated is the ignorant atti-
tude so often adopted towards them. For these
opposites, the two Pillars of the Temple, their
28
magical images or prototypes, represent "those
eternal forces betwixt which the equilibrium of the
universe dependeth. Those forces whose reconcilia-
tion is the Key of Life, whose separation is evil and
death." This, then, is the solution to conflict. They
must be reconciled.
Let me recapitulate. There must be the clear
recognition of the conflict. Its exact nature must
be analysed and faced, and its presence accepted
in all its implications.
One must endeavour to bring up into conscious-
ness, so far as the capabilities of the mind permit,
all the memories of childhood. In a word, he should
attempt to perform a species of what is called in
the Buddhist system the Sammasati meditation.
This consists in a cultivation and rigid examination
of memory. The idea involved here is not that
these recollections in themselves are worth any-
thing, but that raising them up to the surface re-
leases a great deal of tension associated with early
experiences. There is often a tying up of nervous
energy in childhood experiences, in trivial events
which are allowed to be forgotten and to sink into
unconsciousness. But this forgetfulness does not
overcome the shock of nervous exhaustion con-
nected with them. On the contrary, they set up
what are called resistances-resistances to the flow
of life and vitality from the primitive and vital
layers of the Unconscious level.
29
"What matters," remarks Georg Groddeck the
brilliant German physician-psychologist, "is not to
make conscious anything at all of the Unconscious,
but to relieve what is imprisoned, and in so doing
it is by no means rare for the repressed material to
sink into the depths instead of coming into con-
sciousness.•.• What is decisive in the success of
treatment is the removal of resistance."
Beginning with the actual events of the day upon
which the reader determines to commence this ex-
ercise, the meditation should gradually extend its
field of vision until ultimately the events and oc-
currences of the earliest years are brought into the
light of day. The technique is principally one of
the training of the mind to think backwards. Diffi-
cult though at first it may seem, practice leads the
student slowly and gradually to facility in the art
of remembering. The facts of memory confronted
fearlessly, without shame and discomforture, the
resistance to the flow of vitality between the vari-
ous levels of consciousness is broken down, restor-
ing physical, nervous and spiritual health.
As the childhood memories are exposed, the stu-
dent will see for himself in what way the conflict
now bothering him came into manifestation. Since
by definition a neurosis is a maladaptation of the
psyche to life itself, by this process of remembering
he will see in what way he failed to respond prop-
erly to the phenomena of his existence.
30
Realising this, and recognising thoroughly the
nature of his conflict, he must now endeavour to
ignore it. More accurately a more positive attitude
should be adopted. He must develop in an entirely
new direction. It must be remembered, however,
and this is important, that to ignore any symptom
of conflict as manifested in mind or body, is dan-
gerous until the conflict in question has been recog-
nised and accepted. The unconditional acceptance
almost invariably acts as its resolution. Any other
attitude constitutes an escape.
The escape mechanism is that so frequently
adopted by the neurotic and must be avoided. It
is the way of the coward. To face the conflict is to
rob it and .its consequences of crippling fear. Hon-
esty with oneself acts as a catharsis. One finds him-
self endued with a new courage and greater ability
to face one's problem in an entirely new and more
practicable way. Given the recognition of the con..
flict causing constipation, the symptom itself may
be severely ignored, relying upon the bowel after
the lapse of some days to recommence functioning
of its own accord. The conflict and the warring
between the two sides of the psyche, tied a knot as
it were in consciousness preventing the perfect
functioning of the whole. The immediate result of
this is an impediment in the free movement of
nervous energy in the body-mind system, causing
stasis in that part of the system having a relation-
S!
ship or correspondence with the factors concerned
in the conflict.
Occult theory as we have it from tradition may
be extremely useful here. With some degree of
practical experience, we could easily discover the
precise nature of the original conflict by a consid-
eration of that part of the organism to the symp-
toms of which our attention is attracted. For
example, consider one troubled by nephritis. One
of the most significant aspects of the magical tradi-
tion is Astrology. In this latter science the kidneys
are referred to the operation of the planet Venus.
As we know from mythology, Venus is the deity
concerned with love, feeling and emotion. We
would surmise therefore that in the event that the
love or emotional life of an individual has been
frustrated or repressed to such a point where the
psyche finally refused to continue living whilst
hampered by such a neurosis, some expression of
that frustration could be transferred to the neigh-
borhood of the kidneys. Were the frustration
complete and devastating to the psyche, it is not
impossible that we should find a cancer - the
symptom par excellence of the death-wish, the so-
called suicide complex indicative of a division in
the phyche's integrity.
Moreover, we could proceed a step further. We
might enquire as to whether the affliction were on
the right or left, remembering the Qabalistic defini-
32
tion of the Left Pillar as the side of Mercy, and
that on the Right as the Pillar of Severity. ''Un-
balanced mercy is weakness and the fading out of
the will. Unbalanced severity is cruelty and the
barrenness of mind."
Enquiry might elicit the fact that an afHicted
left kidney were symptomatic of one who had been
afraid to taste life to the full. Or on the other hand,
out of sheer compensation, had lived so completely
as to have over-indulged. The right kidney would
indicate symptoms of severe and violent repression
on principle - where the entire emotional life had
been so subjected to continuous frustration because
of an ethical standard that the outraged eros re-
acted upon the body either with acute nephritis or
it may be with cancer.
Where there is trouble with the legs, the patient
being unable to stand and confined to the bed,
some psychological thinkers proffer some such ex-
planation as this. The legs are the things we stand
on, that which gives support to the body. In the
symbolic pageantry utilised by the Unconscious-
and it must be understood that the activity of the
Unconscious proceeds almost exclusively through
what are to us symbols - the instinctual life is our
mental support. It is that which we tend to rely
Upon, our stability and foundation, during life.
Should therefore our understanding of life fall short
of what it should be for us - and obviously that
33
standard varies with different people - so that we
unduly repress our instincts to the point when the
resulting sense of insecurity and anxiety become
intolerable, the psyche achieves a revenge through
an affliction of the supports of the personality.
Thus it is that we learn, so it is said, by illness.
When our supports, no matter of what nature, have
been annihilated, we sometimes seek to enquire
into causes and origins. When the enquiry is hon-
estly furthered, with a sincere view to self-knowl-
edge, and internal resistance broken down by
meditation or analysis, no doubt recovery would
ensue. That is to say, the disappearance of the
alarming symptoms, and a return of normal
function.
The solvent to these difficulties, the practical
solution of the problem, consists primarily in the
elimination so far as possible of fear. Of course,
from the larger poin.t of view, fear is an essential
part of our make-up. Man is so puny a creature on
the face of the earth, and Nature is vast and ter-
rible in her operations. How else could it be that
fear eats at the heart of each of us? But this is a
wholesome fear - a fear which is the beginning of
wisdom. The emotion under consideration is a
pathological thing - fear of the future, fear of
position, a needless worrying about affairs which
cannot be helped or changed, at least not by hug-
ging a constant fear that they will change in a
34
manner that is painful and sad. From the spiritual
point of view, fears such as we have named act as
a great freezer, as an inhibitor of action and of the
free flow of vital energy from within. The man who
is afraid to embark upon a given course of action
because it may lead to failure, or whose apprehen-
sion of success and of the future generally, is hardly
likely to accomplish very much. "Fear is failure"
says one magical aphorism, "and the forerunner of
failure. Be thou therefore without fear, for in the
heart of the coward, virtue abideth not."
One of the most interesting instances of the psy-
cho-therapeutic attitude to fear and anxiety and
the escape-problem as a whole was Groddeck's
treatment, when he was a physician before apply-
ing psychology to his problems, of certain cases of
indigestion and nervous dyspepsia. One of the psy-
chological theorems regarding this form of discom-
fort is that it is due to anxiety. We all know how
bad news or worry affects the digestion, from turn-
ing the food sour to taking away the appetite. But
the root cause of this particular anxiety is not the
problem in hand, but the anxiety which has its
roots in an early conflict and is made the worse
by the occurrence of an immediate problem evok-
ing conflict and anxiety. Groddeck's treatment-
almost the homeopathic principle - emphasised or
comprised a diet of precisely those foods which
formerly disagreed with his patient. If eggs were
the cause of indigestion the diet would comprise
35
eggs until eventually the psychic would give up
attempting to evade the associations which had
been linked to eggs, and the digestive trouble
would in time disappear. To force the psyche to
face its problems and accept them was his idea
rather than that the psyche should continually
baulk from and attempt to flee the symptoms it
threw up in the body. The unconditional accept-
ance of the conflict, and the associations connected
with it, was the first step towards cure. The tech-
nique is, in a word or two, an attack on the escape
mechanism. Integrity cannot be won by an escap-
ist attitude towards life. The reward of the attitude
which escapes from problems and the reality of
life is more likely than not to be nothing but the
gnawing pain of guilt and sin.
The same method is often made use of in other
forms of therapy. Amongst these, for example, is
the treatment of nightmares by analysis. The ter-
ror experienced in nightmare, causing the dreamer
to awaken bathed in perspiration, angered by a
palpitation of the heart, and experiencing an inex-
plicable sense of impending catastrophe, is likewise
due to some conflict or other. Its nature, being un-
conscious, can only be determined by the context
of the dream, and by the lengthy process of con-
fession, free association, and reductive analysis.
But if the dreamer can be trained in his waking
state to realise that the nightmare is only the ex-
pression of an internal conflict, then he has pro-
36
;eeded halfway to the point where it will cease to
bother him. He must accept the presence of such
a disorder rather than attempt to escape it, because
escape is not an adequate solution of a psychic
problem.
This discovery was brought home to us during
the war. Amongst the soldiers at the front were
those who would not recognise the very obvious
fact, that war was a dangerous matter and that
they were afraid. This they would not accept,
though underneath a veritable torrent of fear was
raging, and the whole of the instinctive impulse
was to bolt from the scene of battle. Those who
recognised this impulse but at the same time saw
that flight was impossible and that the war had to
be seen through, came to no mental or spiritual
harm. It was the former type, suffering from a ter-
rible fear but boasting that they were not in the
least afraid, who became affected by shell-shock.
Shell-shock - the shock experienced by the ner-
vous system through the devastating noise of ex-
plosion, had nothing to do with their actual trouble
at all. The cause was simply a cowardly refusal to
face the conflict raging in the psyche. And when
this became so intolerable, an actual split occurred
in consciousness, so that there was a gap in mem-
ory, awareness and in efficiency.
With the acceptance of the theory of conflict as
a cause of nightmare, a subtle change gradually
creeps into the nightmare-dream. The following is
37
one rather fine example, together with the method
of dealing with it.
A woman patient frequently dreamed that she
was hanging from a rope in a room which had an
enormously high ceiling, about fifty or sixty feet
high. The rope was affixed by a hook to the ceiling,
and the weight -imposed upon the hook was grad-
ually loosening the plaster around. Any moment,
the hook would tear loose from the ceiling, and the
body would be dashed to the ground. At this junc-
ture of the dream, unable to face the terror of being
hurled to death on the ground, the woman awoke
in a frenzy of fear, screaming. The advice given in
this particular case - and since the dream is a
typical nightmare, the same technique may be
widely recommended - was to suggest to the
woman the advisability of meditating on the dream
before falling to sleep at night. The suggestion was
to lengthen the term of the dream so as to invite
the nightmare and observe what happened when
the plaster did finally break, tearing the hook from
the ceiling.
Constant and deep reflection on the dream's
theme before sleep was the method by which the
Unconscious could so be influenced as to induce a
vigilant attitude even during the progress of the
phantasy. The topic of meditation would also be
the conscious application of the idea of non-resist-
ance. Let the catastrophe occur, and see what hap-
pens. If the phantasy is being perched on a high
38
cliff and at any moment there is the danger of
being hurled to the ground, awaking at mid-point
in a sweat of fear, then gradually train the mind
to thrust out all resistance to the fall. By methods
such as these resistance and repression is broken
down and fear eliminated from the sphere of
consciousness.
Here, some word should be said about repression
and the means of its elimination. A great many
people have come to believe, through a very casual
reading of some of the early psycho-analytic litera-
ture, that psychology countenances the removal of
repression by means which are unethical and anti-
social. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Repression is always defined as an unconscious and
automatic process. It is a process by which the per-
sonality protects itself against distasteful concepts,
by thrusting them without the horizon of con-
sciousness into the dark and forbidding region of
the Unconscious. Since this process begins very
early in life, the Unconscious is by middle age
stuffed with a mass of repressed material- ideas
about parents and relatives, associations connected
with environment, infantile beliefs and actions.
Suppression, on the other hand, is a deliberate and
conscious thing. It presupposses a process of con-
scious selection and elimination, in which one al-
ternative is suppressed in favour of another.
It is repression, the unconscious process of thrust-
ing things out of sight, which is the dangerous
39
method. It is .dangerous because repressed emo-
tions and feelings lock up memory and power in
the Unconscious. Because ideas become associated
with each other, forming definite complexes, there
is, if repressed memories begin to grow by associa-
tion, a splitting off of one side of the mind at the
expense of the other with a consequent locking up
of energy and vitality which should be available
for the entire personality. The conquest of repres-
sion proceeds as with the conquest of internal con-
flict previously described.
There is no need to live an anti-social or vicious
life, one of self-indulgence or of degradation as so
many people think. To be free from a repression
does not argue that one should have behaved like
"a young man about town." Though that is not to
say that a reasonable satisfaction of the instinctual
life should be eschewed where this is at all possible.
But the frank realisation and acceptance of the
human personality as many-sided, and a refusal to
blind oneself to experience no matter of what kind,
will go far towards relieving the partition erected
between the Unconscious and the Conscious, and
removing resistance and repression.
To restate the attitude expounded in this chap-
ter, I conceive of analytical psychology as the spouse
of the ancient system of Magic. For psychology has
succeeded in evolving a system which can be ap-
plied to almost any individual who wishes to know
the several departments and constituents of his
40
own personality. Possibly for the first time in the
history of civilised thought, there is a technique
which is of inestimable value to the average man.
It is of supreme value to the student of Magic and
Mysticism, who, too often, labours under several
delusions of what it is that he hopes to accomplish,
and in what length of time he will do so. A study
of analysis will prove first of all that he cannot pro-
ceed quicker than his own Unconscious permits
him. This will prevent gate-crashing, and an irra-
tional enthusiasm and desire for speed. Secondly,
through the elimination of erroneous ideas as to
himself, the phantasms of wish-fulfilment and in-
sensate day-dreaming, he will have obtained a
more comperhensive account of what magical and
meditation systems can accomplish, and what de-
gree of achievement in these spheres is open to him.
He will be entirely less subject to delusion and de-
ception because his attraction to M~gic will not
have been caused by the unconscious desire to
escape from the pressing problems of his immedi-
ate existence with which he finds himself unable
efficiently to cope.
Moreover, he will have familiarised himself with
the true extent of his own sense of inferiority. The
compulsive necessity of becoming unduly aggres-
sive because of an imagined or pathological inferi-
ority will no longer urge him to an intolerable sense
of deficiency. Being acquainted with the funda-
mental problem of insecurity which every thinking
41
individual is bound to have, since man is so appar-
ently insignificant and unimportant when com-
pared to the vastness of the universe, he will not
be liable to adopt extreme religious or scientific no-
tions from so-called spiritual experience or labora-
tory experiment to buttress up his own desire for
some one thing which is secure and reliable.
Analysis is the logical precursor of spiritual at-
tainment and magical experiment. It should com-
prise definitely the first stage of spiritual training.
Were it possible, and were there magical schools in
existence, it would gratify me enormously to see
magical training preceded by six or twelve months
of application to reductive analysis, pursued by
sympathetic physicians or lay-analysts who had
long and intimate experience with clinical work.
The magical schools must open a Department of
Analytical Psychology, if their own systems are to
attain public prominence worthy of attention and
patronage. Such schools, though offering courses
of training considerably prolonged, would eventu-
ally develop such a type of individual that the
public would eliminate "dangerous" from its asso-
ciation with Magic, and be obliged to take cogni-
sance of the soundness of its technique. This union
of two systems would, for Magic at any rate, build
up psychological credit, and a sense of great relia-
bility and prestige would accrue to it.
One of the greatest obstacles to success in Magic,
to any kind of worth-while result in the mystical
4Z
sciences, is that the psycho-emotional system of its
average student is hopelessly clogged with infantile
and adolescent predilections which have not been
recognised as such. The ego is compelled to extreme
courses of action, as though by compulsion. And
underneath his every activity lurks the uncon-
scious spectre - fear. It is precisely with these
monsters of phantasy that analytical psychology
can deal effectively, and it is from such absurd
obstacles that the magical student is a confirmed
but unconscious sufferer.
By associating Magic with analysis, we should
be able to avoid the pitfalls into which our prede-
cessors fell so headlong. The production of genius
- more specifically a religious and mystical type of
genius - ever the goal of Magic, should be more
within our grasp than ever before, and consider-
ably more open to achievement.
These ideas are mentioned not because a syste-
matic union of Magic and Psychology will be here
presented, but in the hope that this effort will spur
some psychologist acquainted with magical and
mystical techniques to attempt such a task. Who-
ever does succeed in welding the two indissolubly
together, to him mankind will ever be grateful. For
such a union comprises the marriage of the archaic
with the modem, the Unconscious with the Con-
scious - the precursor of the birth of the Golden
Flower not for any individual alone but for man-
kind as a whole.
43

CHAPTER TWO
_HERE are then, roughly, the broad divi-
_ sions of certain principles common to both
Psychology and to Magic. And it will be
conceded by all that the problems relating to fear,
anxiety, insecurity and inferiority, in connection
with the broad divisions of the Conscious and the
Unconscious, are fundamental to both systems.
Therefore, before being able to consider any of the
techniques of the methods employed by Magic, it
is essential that we analyse a little further this
classification of the psyche into the Conscious and
the Unconscious. While a simple outlook has cer-
tainly its advantages, yet difficulties arise demand-
ing a further subdivision and calling for the
consideration of additional factors operative within
the Unconscious. It is really not so simple as seems
at first sight. Magic employs a somewhat more
extensive view of the two primary aspects of the
psyche. And it is necessary to consider at greater
45
length the intricate nature of Man, so that we
may realize more or less exactly what it is that in
magical experiments we are desirous of achieving.
It seems to me that the division of the psyche
into Conscious and Unconscious is entirely too
simple to prove adequate as a means of explana-
tion. The almost over-used instance of the ice-berg
- with one-seventh of its mass above the surface
and six-sevenths below - is all right as far as it
goes. But does it go far enough? If that division is
to avail us at all in practice, that portion of the
psyche which is below the surface of our normal
awareness demands more insight into its nature
and rather deeper analysis. There is, therefore,
some wide realization of the inadequacy of this
division, varying with the different schools and
systems of practice. Thus in the Freudian school
we meet with the primary concepts of the libido,
which is defined with particular emphasis on the
sexual urge. There is also the slightly broader class-
ification of psychic activity into a triad of the Id,
the Super-ego, and the Ego.
In the system propounded by Dr. C. G. lung,
we meet as before with the libido, though here it
is defined not as sexuality but in far more philo-
sophical terms as the sum total of psychic energy
and vitality, and its expression is through instinct,
desire and function. The faculties of the mind also
are described in a four-fold pattern, operating in a
positive and negative way. There are the feeling,
46
thinking, sensation, and intuitional functions of the
psyche, each capable of a passive or an active re-
sponse, depending upon whether the psyche be in-
troverted or extroverted. The Unconscious itself
is also conceived to have a dual aspect. That part
of it which is personal and individual, and that
great stream of power, archetype and image of
which the former is only a part - the Collective
Unconscious. It is a universal and uniform sub-
stratum common to the whole of mankind. We
may consider it to be the historical background
from which every psyche and every consciousness
has proceeded or evolved. It is the primordial basis
upon which each race and people and civilization
evolves its own individual pattern. It is this that
the mediaeval alchemists called Anima Mundi.
While having innumerable points of contact with
the above psychologies, the magical conception dif-
fers in several respects. For one thing, .it prefers to
use a diagram to express its viewpoint, believing
that reflection upon this glyph, which for centuries
has been an object of meditation, will yield illumi-
nating ideas associated in the Unconscious with its
parts. Secondly, it believes that man is a more com-
plex being than the newer schools would allow. The
diagram it employs is a Qabalistic glyph called the
Tree of Life. This shows the ten spheres or Sephi-
ros as they are called arranged in a geometrical
pattern to form three columns or pillars. That to
the left shows three spheres one above the other,
47
The T... e~
of Life.
and is called the Left Pillar or the Pillar of Mercy.
The Right Pillar or that of Severity also shows
three spheres, while the central pillar is indicated
by four spheres one above the other, the Pillar of
Benificence. To each one of these spheres is ascribed
a different characteristic of the Self. That is, the
diagram expresses the integral nature of man ac-
cording to ten quite distinct functions. It is the
unity of these ten factors which together comprise
what we choose to call man.
The Id, to use the Freudian term, is the most
central core of man, the deepest level of his Un-
conscious, being represented on the Tree by the
upper-most sphere of the middle pillar. Reference
to the chart opposite will elucidate the problem
enormously, clarifying my explanations. At the
outset, a word or two must be added about the em-
ployment of foreign words and an unfamiliar ter-
minology. It is, in my opinion, a regrettable fact
that objections should be raised to unfamiliar and
strange words. When some new language is to be
learned, the alphabet is at first difficult to acquire.
This happens in Magic, for in most instances there
are no terms existent in English to express the idea
to be conveyed, and where such a term does exist
it does not have the appropriate psychological or
spiritual background to indicate what is required
of it. It is my object, nevertheless, to co-relate such
terms where they do exist with those of the QabaI-
istic system, to indicate that it has long recognised
49
these concepts now being dealt with by Psychol..
ogy. Not only so, but it has evolved a profound
technique whereby such potencies may be brought
into manifest operation.
The magical correspondence of the psychological
Id, or Es as Dr. Georg Groddeck called it, is the
YECHIDAH - a word meaning the Monad, the
Self, the paternal Ens of Light. It is the "essence of
mind which is intrinsically pure," to adopt a defini-
tion of an Eastern religious text. It is also the
Buddha-nature, the realization of which is that
alone which differentiates the enlightened man, the
sage, from him who is ignorant and unenlightened.
Just as in physics, where the electron may be con-
sidered either as an electrical particle or as a sys-
tem of radiations or waves, so this YECHIDAH
may be considered from two quite distinct points
of view. It is the innermost kernel of the Self, the
deepest core of consciousness itself, unconscious-
ness to our ordinary awareness - while on the
other hand it is the life-flow itself, the current of
libido, which is the sum-total of our vitality and
our life.
Since the translation of Eastern texts has been
made available, many psychologists have pounced
on several Chinese terms for inclusion within the
technical nomenclature of their own systems. One
such term selected by J ung to have reference to a
concept such as explained above in connection with
the YECHIDAH, is Tao. This term, so ambiguous
50
to the Western mind accustomed to precision and
accurate definition, has been variously translated
as God, or a goal, or heaven. The sinologue Wil-
helm prefers the word "Meaning" and J ung em-
ployed it as having a closer association with the
conception which he wished to explain, for it is
precisely this factor in consciousness which, even-
tually, provides a meaning for life and for man.
And in the diagram which is provided in The Secret
0/ the Golden Flower to which Jung wrote an eru-
dite and profound European commentary, the
placing of the psychic factor Tao is similar to the
position of YECHIDAH upon the Qabalistic Tree
of Life.
Though I wish to avoid metaphysics so far-as is
possible, certain theories demand expression. In
order to retain accuracy with simplicity, it must be
stated that the Qabalistic tradition posits a uni-
versal stream of Life, described in terms of Light,
behind as it were the Monad. That is to say, the
YECHIDAH, so far from being an ultimate di-
vision in itself, is but one particular point or section
of the universal life or the Collective Unconscious,
and owes its separate existence to that pulsating
stream behind it.
It is interesting here to record that Groddeck
surmised that the Unconscious, in the ordinary
Freudian sense, is the precursor of reason, the
brain-mind; whereas the It produces the Uncon-
scious, the brain and everything else that belongs
51
to life. The Unconscious is a part of the psyche, the
psyche a part of the It. He also believed that what-
ever happens in or through a man, from the mo-
ment of conception to the occurrence of death,
even what he reasons out for himself and does of
his own free will, everything is directed by this
unknown It.
If we wish to consider the Self in its widest sense
as consisting of so many layers of consciousness,
not unlike an onion, having ten peelings or skins,
then the YECHIDAH is the deepest, or central
layer. Those immediately above it - and it must
be remembered that this is figurative speech, and
that the spatial analogue does not hold good here
- are what we name the CHIAH and NES-
CHAMAH. These would correspond to the anima
and the animus in the system elaborated by Jung.
Again referring to the Chinese mystical text
commented upon at length by Jung, we will see
that according to the Chinese the whole of Nature
is permeated "by two principles, one positive or
masculine, the other negative or feminine. These
are named the Yang and the Yin. These two prin-
ciples are present in the human psyche, and look-
ing at it from the widest possible point of view, we
could assume that the Conscious level of the mind
is the Yang, and the Unconscious is the Yin. But
this division, because it is the widest generalisation,
is inadequate and is capable of further classifica-
tion. Because within the Mind there are both posi-
52
tive and negative elements, factors which are those
of thought and feeling. This holds true also of the
Unconscious, and though we have referred this to
the Yin, within its sphere there is both a Yang and
a Yin operation. If we refer to one of the deepest
levels of the Unconscious, then this Yang and Yin
operation is what Jung means by the Animus and
Anima, and what the Qabalah indicates by CHIAH
and NESCHAMAH.
It may be useful to quote definitions of these two
psychological principles to provide authoritative
explanations as we proceed. One pupil of Jung's,
Joan Corrie, the author of ABC of Jung's Psycl/'ol-
ogy, says the following: uThe anima is in contact
with the objects of the inner reality - the images
of the collective unconscious - as the persona is
in contact with the objects of external reality. The
anima is an archetypal figure that might almost be
described as the precipitate of man's age-long im~
pressions of woman - not his conscious reasoned
ideas, but the unconscious inherited mould into
which she is cast." The anima is a correspondence
of the N eschamah which is feminine and passive,
representing the true spiritual vision of intuition
or the imagination.
Here it may be interpolated that it has always
been an axiom of the magical system that the being
which is active physically is passive spiritually and
vice versa. In many an occult work do we find some
S3
such statement as this: "Man is termed the posi-
tive member of the two sexes. In reality only his
physical body is positive. His etheric body is purely
negative ..•• On the other hand, while the female
is commonly supposed to be the negative of the
two sexes, it is really her physical body that is
negative, for her etheric body is positive, and the
real creative pole of the sexes." It will readily be
conceded that every person is psychologically bi-
sexual. He is a combination of both masculine and
feminine elements, and within him operate the
Yang and the Yin. In man the feminine elements,
and in the woman the masculine or positive traits,
are alike unconscious. And the deepest and truest
archetypes of these unconscious traits are in the
anima and animus, the CHIAH and NESCHA-
MAH. Here, after a fashion, is the explanation of
the frequently observed phenomenon of the un-
paralleled tenderness and love of which many a
man is capable, and the harsh and cruel lengths to
which certain types of women may go when in-
furiated or aroused.
True, therefore, to its compensating or balancing
principle, the soul or Unconscious of a man has a
feminine bias which we refer to the anima, while
that of a woman has a masculine bias, the animus.
This latter is defined as a constantly changing fig-
ure, its energies in a state of continuous fluctua-
tion. The animus is not a persistent unvarying
54
figure as is the anima. The typical woman finds
her conscious feeling expression centered in one
person of the opposite sex; she is monogamous ex-
ternally. But, internally, her unconscious is appar-
ently polygamous, "for the name of her animus
might be 'legion.' He represents the logos principle,
the masculine reason of her unconscious nature."
On the Tree of Life, this animus principle is
equivalent to CHIAH, the Will; this word also
means life, animal life. This principle is the first
creative vehicle of the Es, as its other pole is NES-
CHAMAH, understanding and love. The Will is
in essence a dual principle; it presupposes a begin-
ning and an end. For obviously to will a thing is
at once to admit that you have not that thing. To
desire to be a thing is to assume that you are not
the thing desired. True love, however, is centred
always upon one object, an object with which the
lover seeks to identify himself to the exclusion of
all else. It is this love which fundamentally is im-
plied in the term anima. To love is to understand.
Understanding bestows insight and intuition. This
is anima.
Tao, animus and anima, or YECHIDAH,
CHIAH and NESCHAMAH, constitute the in-
nermost core of what we have chosen to call the
psychic onion, the primordial principles operating
in the deepest levels of the Unconscious. It might
be said that this is the level which is always in
55
direct contact with the racial and universal levels
of the Collective Unconscious - that dynamic and
ubiquitous stream of life and vitality of which the
YECHIDAH, together with its vehicles, comprise
just one particular centre of consciousness.
Before proceeding further, and since I have used
the onion as a metaphor of the self, it may be wise
to quote a paragraph of Groddeck's Exploring the
Unconscious: "We all of us fancy that we must
have a core at the center, something that is not
merely shell; we would like to hold within us some
specially dainty kernel, to be a nut protecting the
future, the everlasting. And we do not realise, can-
not realise, that we have in fact no kernel, but are
made up of one leaf on top of another from outer-
most to innermost, that, in fact, we are onions.
But in the onion every leaf shares its essential na-
ture. The onion is honest right through, and only
becomes dishonest, rotten, if it tries to grow a
kernel different from the rest of it, and to destroy
the peel as though it were something false, some-
thing no honourable onion should acknowledge...•
Everything in us is a peeling, but in every peeling
is the essential nature of the whole. The self is
an onion self." This is similar to the Buddhist
conception.
The triad of principles just considered, the Super-
nals, being the more primitive part of the psyche,
the ancient centre which harks back to the count-
56
less epochs of the distant past, we must now tum
our attention to its compensating and balancing
aspect, the conscious ego. This clearly is a much
more modem and recent development in the age-
less history of the Self - a comparatively modem
evolution - a channel by means of which we have
become conscious of the original primeval and fun-
damental unconsciousness from which we have
emerged. And because of this development of
awareness concerning these deeper levels of our-
selves, so are we able to examine and understand
them. It is by this particular evolution that we
are able to make conscious the content of the Un-
conscious. This definition of evolution is practically
identical with the definitions of both Psychology
and Magic - that is, that their objects are to ex-
pand the horizon of the mind, to enlarge the sphere
or scope of consciousness itself. These methods are
those of evolution itself.
In Magic, this conscious ego is denominated the
RUACH. It comprises those spheres on the dia-
grammatic Tree of Life which are numbered from
four to eight inclusive. It is an aggregate of func-
tions rather than an integrated and single unit-
which is probably one reason why some psychol-
ogists believe that this part of us is as yet very
unstable in its formation. Also that the unfavour-
able and faulty circumstances surrounding the
childhood of most people greatly enhance the ten-
57
dency to disintegration which already exists. This
aggregate comprises memory, will, feeling and
thinking, clustered about the ego itself, which is
the central sphere - five in number. Its life-blood
is the current of thought and perception just as
the life-blood of the Supernals is the libido, the
current of life and energy. The Jungian concept
of the ego, or Conscious mind, is the Persona, the
personality which comes into relation with external
things. It is a mask. It is the individual's mode of
adaptation to the world, his character as it appears
to be and as he quite often himself conceives it.
It is an evolved mechanism to acquire contact with
the outside world, so that by means of experiences
thus obtained the It, or the YECHIDAH, may
come to a self-conscious realisation of its own di-
vine powers and high nature.
It is in connection with this persona, this think-
ing RUACH that we would do well to reflect upon
two aphorisms of the Eastern psychological sys-
tems. At first sight, it would appear that they are
mutually exc~usive and contradictory. In one East-
ern book it is written, "The mind is the slayer of
the real. Let the disciple slay the slayer." This
alone will be a problem to the average student. In
the West, generally speaking, the universe is con-
sidered as having two large divisions, the physical
and the mental or spiritual, the two latter being
spoken of as synonyms. So that if the mind itself
58
is defined as a hindrance to the perception of real-
ity, most of us would be plunged in a rather diffi-
cult quandary.
The second is "The essence of mind is intrinsi-
cally pure." Should we desire to translate terminol-
ogy, we will find I think that the Jungian Tao, or
the very deepest level of the Unconscious, is as
near an exact definition of "the essence of mind"
that we could find. It is only a popular and false
misconception of psychological concepts that rele-
gated the Unconscious into a mere receptacle of
the evil shadow-beings of human nature. Some
have considered it exclusively as a receptacle retain-
ing the primeval slime deposits, harbouring the
most violently explosive material. But in point of
fact, as but little practical acquaintance with the
problems of Analysis proves, the Unconscious does
not harbour exclusively explosive motives. The
Unconscious stream only becomes explosive when
the RUACH, the Conscious mind, has repressed
its legitimate and just activity. The taint of the
RUACH is a self-sufficient conscious outlook. Its
vice is an over-refined and emasculated attitude
towards life. A river dammed somewhere along its
channel is bound to flow over, and when this does
Occur the river cannot be blamed. Should there be
necessity to erect a permanent or even a temporary
dam, suitable precautions should be taken to en-
Sure that some other channel is kept open whereby
59
the excess waters may seek their outlet. So also
with the Unconscious. Itself - the essence of mind
which is intrinsically pure - it is neither dangerous
nor explosive. But if the individual be prevented
from having access to life due to some maladapta-
tion to environment, some failure fully to express
both the Yang and the Yin of his nature, that
repression acts as a constant source of irritation,
presenting always some likelihood of a psychic
explosion.
It is this false dam, the obstacle which is erected
along the river's course - psychological resistance
- which is the "mind" which slays or prevents
the realisation of reality. How many of us really
l;1nderstand life and the world as they really are?
That is without projecting upon our perceptions,
the desire of what we should like to be? Few have
insight into our deepest motives, the real causes of
our attraction to our friends, of revulsion from our
enemies. There are not many, I surmise, who can
at all times account for their actions in terms of
consciousness. The majority of us are moved a
great deal of the time by involuntary compulsion.
It is a true saying that habits are a necessity im-
posed upon us by evolution to ensure the smooth
functioning of the psyche. But they are necessary
only in so far as they do permit the psyche to func-
tion freely. And with many it is just that mass of
habits and predilections which is the barrier to the
60
free activity of the psyche. To question people as
to the purpose of their habits, a survey of their
activity and why they were formed originally, is
to obtain much illumination as to what is implied
by the phrase "The mind is the slayer of the Real."
In point of fact, it is not the mind which inhibits
our perceiving what is real, what is worthwhile and
desirable in life. It is the false development of mind
- that mass of prejudices, emotional biases, im-
properly formulated philosophies and superstitions,
relics of the inheritance from misguided parents-
which is here denoted.
And until we do understand its nature and per-
ceive its extent, never shall we be freed from its
dominion, or released from its compulsion. And
until we have thoroughly understood our own be-
havior, motives, and the mechanism of our own
attractions and repulsions, we have no insight.
Possibly then we should be able to perceive that
underlying this conscious mind - which hitherto
we assumed as the sole reality, the only criterion
of judgment - is a vast area of inspiration and
beauty which is the intrinsically pure essence of
mind. If we could open ourselves, or become fully
conscious of, this essence so that its content with-
out distortion were capable of ascending within
sight of our focus of consciousness, then should we
begin to realize as never before the true nature of
life and its problems. "In such a case" remarks Dr.
61
Jung in his Collected Papers on Analytical Psychol-
ogy, "the Unconscious vouchsafes us that further-
ance and assistance which bountiful Nature is al-
ways ready to give man in overflowing abundance.
The Unconscious possesses possibilities of wisdom
that are completely closed to consciousness ..•• It
creates prospective combinations just as our con-
sciousness does, only they are considerably superior
to the conscious combinations both in refinement
and extent. The Unconscious may therefore be an
unparalleled guide for human beings." When this
state or condition of consciousness has been arrived
at, when what formerly was unconscious has been
brought within the horizon of consciousness, the
entire character of life becomes changed and illu-
minated. Previously it was a thing of fear and
horror. Nearly all men, underneath, possess some
sense of inferiority and insecurity. All seek in one
way or another to rise above that inferiority, and
to discover some rock of security to which they
may feel anchored. It is when we have attained to
a realisation of the "pure essence of mind" that
inferiority is practically banished and security ob-
tained; and then we can deal with life and our
fellows.
The ninth sphere or Sephirah on the Tree of Life
is that of the NEPHESCH, which means the Ani-
mal Soul. It is the sphere proper of the animal
instincts and urges, what may in truth be called
the Freudian Unconscious - that which was con-
62
scious at one time or at one stage of development
but which has since been lost to consciousness. It
is regarded as comprising those psychic faculties
which are not conscious. All the various automatic,
habitual and routine actions; all the things that
we say and do "without thinking" and all the thou-
sand things we never really "do" at all, these proc-
esses are assigned to the Unconscious realm, to
the principle of the NEPHESCH. To it is related
the cerebellum, the hind section of the brain, and
it is intimately connected with the glandular and
sympathetic nervous systems. As such it is that
part of our being which regulates the circulation
of the blood, the pulsation of the heart, our diges-
tion and respiration. All the promptings of desire
and the urges of passion that spring unbidden
within us, have their seat in NEPHESCH. This is
the underworld of the psyche through which we
get comparatively close to Nature, to the elemental
side of life. It is the undermind in which function
the primary instincts of self-preservation and re-
production. It is the seat of the sex instinct itself.
The Jungian concept of the Unconscious might be
the appropriate term for this side of life, as is held
by the Freudian school, where as the much abused
word Superconscious would be distinctly descrip-
tive of the Supernal Sephiros of the YECHIDAH,
CHIAH and NESCHAMAH corresponding to the
Jungian Unconscious.
The tenth Sephirah is that of the physical brain
63
and the active physical body. Here it is that we
find the receptacle in which the other principles
have their abode, and the instrument through
which they function. This tenth sphere, MALKUS,
the sphere of action, we may consider as active, as
Yang, when compared to YESOD, the Yin, which
we may define as the seat of the impelling instincts,
predatory lusts and animal impulses. On the other
hand, the RUACH, which is an active thinking
principle, we likewise may describe as Yang in
relation to the Yin of the Supernals, which are
quiet, passive, and hidden behind the scene. MAL-
KUS has innumerable other correspondences, but
a consideration of these does not at the moment
concern us.
It is obvious that disorders in the proper func-
tion of the higher or interior psychic principles will
have their corresponding effect on the body, which,
as the tenth Sephirah, is but the synthesis of the
preceding nine. Any conflict between parts of the
psychic make-up will accordingly present a physi-
cal disturbance corresponding in position and in-
tensity to the exact nature of the lesion. By purely
empirical methods the ancients developed a vast
series of correspondences between the various parts
of man's body and his psychic constituents. It is
this tradition which forms in reality the fundamen-
tal basis of what is true and valid in such arts as
character-reading, palmistry, phrenology, and the
such. For as within, so without. And what is
64
present within the mind is bound in some way to
react upon the obverse of the psycho-physical
medallion.
There is another method of classifying the com-
ponents of the psyche by means of a rather differ-
ent view of the Tree of Life. The method just
completed considered each separate sphere. But
at the same time we may look at the Tree from
the point of view of its levels or ..Jayers. In this
event, taking the first Sephirah alone, we have
what technically is known as the Archetypal
World. It is that underlying essence of the Uncon-
scious which is the most primordial of all, its func-
tions reaching back into the immeasurable past.
It is a stratum whose characteristic is those sym-
bols and archetypes which were first assimilated to
the simple homogeneous structure, if it · may be
called, of the evolving consciousness. The Hindu
system calls this condition or state TURYA or
ecstasy, absolute consciousness, and its experience
in consciousness is of that rapturous type which
the Mystics of all ages have testified to as Union
with God. In this Divine World, we contact those
subtle images which the ancients called the Gods.
Or rather the ordinary every-day sphere of con-
sciousness becomes invaded by a volitional up-
welling of these archaic images and archetypes-
the first set of psychic forms, subtle, intangible,
and dynamic, through which the libido flows on
its outward journey from the It.
6S
The 2nd and srd Sephiros constitute what is
called the Creative World, the state of SUSHUPTI.
It is that stratum of the primordial psychic sphere
in which function the principles of the anima and
animus, wisdom and understanding. Therefore its
reaction upon the ego would be through a stimula-
tion of the creative faculties, and an enhancement
of its entire horizon and field of awareness. As the
second state of consciousness, it has a correspon-
dence with dreamless sleep. Yet even this descrip-
tion is inadequate, for dreamless though its charac-
teristic may be, it is too vital to be defined in so
passive a way. In certain philosophic literatures, it
is held that SUSHUPTI is a state in which even
criminals commune with the higher nature, and
enter into the spiritual plane. It is said to be the
great spiritual reservoir by means of which the
tremendous momentum towards evil living is
checked. Though involuntary with such people, it
is constantly salutary in effect.
The next level to be considered is comprised of
the 4th to the 9th Sephiros inclusive; it is called
the Formative World or SWAPNA. This is the
world of dreams; it is the level of the instinctual
drives and the dynamic urge to expression. Its
images, the pageantry of dreams and the fantastic
adventure of the night, are those supplied by the
experience of the day although the dramatisation
of the actual dream is the exclusive content and
prerogative of this plane.
66
Where there is an effort on the part of the higher
Genius or It to transmit noble impulses or in-
spiration from its own divine realm, the state of
SWAPNA has to be passed through. This passage
colours the tenor of the impulse, imparting to what
may originally have been pure thought and trans-
cendentalism an emotional tone or feeling which is
expressed in terms of symbolism. Thus whatever
ideas are impacted upon our consciousness from
higher spheres are tinted with the dream symbol-
ism of the Formative World. A wide knowledge of
the nature and significance of symbols, and an
acquaintance with the operation of SWAPNA is
necessary if the original message and its meaning
are to be divined. Here we have, also, the emotional
mechanism providing the drive and impulse to
physical action, the endocrine glands. For the
physical positions of the more important glands
correspond to important centres and dynamisms
of this particular level of the psychic structure.
The loth Sephirah corresponds to the active
world, ]AGRATA, the top layer of consciousness,
the ego, that surface consciousness which attends
primarily to the business of every day life. It is
an evolution emergent from the dark secret levels
of the Unconscious and, paradox that it is, has
usurped the function and rule of the source from
which it has sprung. On these four different levels
of consciousness, which the Qabalists have called
67
the four Worlds, the several principles of man have
their operation and unceasing activity.
It is precisely with these different phases of
man's psychic nature that the technique of Magic
deals. Here is the motive of a former suggestion
that analysis should be so co-ordinated with Magic
as to comprise the first stage of development. For
in climbing the Tree which is the formal expression
to denote the realisation of the Sephiros from the
bottom upwards, the first approached is the 9th,
that principle of man which is called the NEPH-
ESCH. That is to say, the next level of conscious-
ness beneath the ordinary waking state of the
Active World, is the level of dreams and lurid
image and picture. It is the most superficial layer
of the Unconscious - using this term as the com-
posite of the Formative, Creative, and Archetypal
levels of the Tree of Life. The Formative World
is that of the warring instincts and unconscious
conflicts, the realm 6f the predatory lusts and pas-
sions. It is with this particular level that the ana-
lyst must deal in the majority of his patients in
order to resolve those conflicts that have their ex-
istence in that plane. If there be conflict and inces-
sant warfare here, how can the flow of spiritual
energy descend from the higher Sephiros, or, de-
pending upon one's point of view, ascend from the
deeper levels of consciousness? If the direct result
of an unresolved conflict is to tie a knot as it were
in the psyche, naturally there is no free passage for
68
the libido, which is thus thwarted and frustrated.
How can access be obtained to the more primitive,
diviner parts of the psyche, those archaic levels of
the Unconscious whose nature is entirely spiritual,
where function those principles which aspire to the
super-human shining heights, if the channel be
dammed and the way barred by conflict? If the
message or revelations from these lofty heights
are changed in nature and perverted by the pres-
ence within the mind of a powerful and ugly
complex, how can there be real magical and spiri-
tual development?
Since Analytical Psychology confines itself, by
its own definition, to an examination and a clarifi-
cation of the two upper and most superficial levels
of consciousness, this process must be considered
the preliminary aspect of magical routine. Where
Analysis preaches the gospel of re-education in the
attitude towards life, and when we find psychologi-
cal patients producing magical designs or man-
dalas of the type that Jung reproduces in The
Secret of the Golden Flower, here we have an en-
croachment upon or a usurpation of the realm and
function of Magic, and a transcending of the limi-
tations of the ordinary analytical technique.
Just as the technique of Analysis must comprise
the first stage of development, so to my mind the
second stage is occupied by various elementary
techniques of Magic. I say elementary advisedly,
for it is only those elementary techniques which the
69
average Westerner may ever feel inclined to take
upon himself, being debarred from more intense
application to the magical art by such limitations,
among other things, as time, the necessity for a
business and domestic life, etc. The more advanced
magical routines are for the exceptional person, and
comprise the training of the human psyche to com-
plete spiritual mastery. Splendid vision though this
is, an ideal goal for the few, it is nevertheless out-
side the capacity of most of us who are obliged to
live the ordinary life of the twentieth century man
or woman.
The preliminary techniques we may consider
under several headings, viz: -
I. The Qabalistic Cross.
2. The Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Penta-
gram.
3. The formulation of the Middle Pillar and the
Tree of Life in the Sphere of Sensation.
4- The methods of Circumambulation, and The
Vibratory Formula of the Middle Pillar.
s. Ceremonial Magic.
For the moment, I shall content myself with
presenting a bird's-eye view of each so that a pic-
ture of the entire scheme may be envisaged. The
first method describes a formulation upon the body
of a geometrical figure the effect of which is de-
70
signed to call into operation the deepest levels of
the Unconscious. If I say at the outset that every
technique of Magic is intended in different ways
to open the conscious ego's field of vision to the
deeper, more spiritual aspects of the divine nature,
there can be no possibility of misunderstanding.
The procedure of the Qabalistic Cross is through
the cultivation of a species of, what is called in
psychology, the fantasy, of encouraging the imag-
ination to build images through which the power
of the It may flow unimpeded.
Though the most elementary, it is in reality one
of the most important phases of magical work. In-
dispensable to the beginner, it is of just as much
value to the more advanced student. It is an axiom
of Magic that it is the divine will alone which is
capable of conferring illumination and enlighten-
ment, and so acting that every action of the ego
has its correct place in the scheme of things. Thus
it is that the Qabalistic Cross is the ideal means of
placing the ego under the direct surveillance of the
YECHIDAH, the divine will in every human
being. It is an excellent method for rendering the
consciousness porous and susceptible to the dic-
tates of the more responsible and humanitarian
levels of the Unconscious.
The Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram,
described as the second method, is the sequel to
the former exercise. It is a technique designed to
eliminate from the psychic sphere those interior
71
elements which are undesirable. By an effort of the
imagination, the student visualises those qualities
or conflicts or psychic lesions which are not re-
quired. By means of vibrating certain sonorous
sounds called anciently Divine Names, whilst trac-
ing certain lineal figures both in the air and within
his imagination, he is enabled to project them from
him. With the projection outwards, and assisted by
the increased flow of libido, they may be disinte-
grated by him. Other forces, archetypes of the
deeper levels, are formulated and invoked to assist
in so difficult a task. The entire ritual, properly
performed, is one calculated to lead the student
slowly but gradually towards the heights envisaged
by the system.
The most important routine method of spiritual
development in the entire Magical system is, in my
estimation, the third exercise in my classification.
If the student remembers the Tree of Life he will
see that the Middle Pillar is a series of five spheres
arranged in a single upright column. The exercise
proceeds by the visualization of these Sephiros as
circles or spheres of light in various significant
parts of the physical body. More accurately, they
are to be realized as centres already existent in the
aura, which is for this purpose defined as an egg-
shape of subtle electric matter, a magnetic field
which surrounds and interpenetrates the material
body of man. The object of this visualisation is to
awaken these Sephiros in balanced activity as a
71.
means of providing the higher Genius, as the It
may be named, with a psychic mechanism by
which it may freely function within consciousness
at the intent of the ego.
I t will be recalled, as stated as an axiom, that
certain of the psychological principles of man have
their correspondence with various organs and limbs
and parts of the physical body. The exercise called
the Middle Pillar is a demonstration of this axiom,
giving the attributions of these principles as a prac-
tical experiment to be attempted. The visualisation
of the Sephiros and the measured vibration of Di-
vine Names arouse the centres of this aura, or
Sphere of Sensation, from their former latent con-
dition. The effect is gradually to bring into opera-
tion the dormant and hitherto unsuspected parts
of the psyche. The results of this practice evince,
for one thing, an unparalleled increase of vitality
and power. This induces and is succeeded by a
calmer judgment, less perturbable by the affairs of
the external life, though the capacity for dealing
with it remains unimpaired. It produces a solution
to spiritual perplexity, bringing to an end the curse
of indecisiveness, assisting the mind to a more re-
sponsive and open attitude to the dictates or intu-
itions of the higher Self.
At first, only the Middle Pillar receives atten-
tion. But as practice renders the student expert,
even dexterous in manipulating his visualisations,
he will find it worth while to lengthen the duration
73
of the practice, increasing the field of his attention.
Balance and equilibrium brought within achieve-
ment by the formulation of the centres of the
Middle Pillar, then the Sephiros of the two side
Pillars of Mercy and Severity are added to the
picture. Progress is bound to be slow and gradual
here, but given patience and perseverance a new
sphere of power and spiritual perception will un-
fold itself.
As a means of giving poise to neurotic patients,
and of assisting the task of analysis, the practice of
the Middle Pillar may be recommended to psychol-
ogists. For by these means the conscious mind is
rendered calm and still, the desirable condition to
permit the ascent of the archetypes and inspiration
of other levels of consciousness. During the period
of attention to the Middle Pillar, dreams far more
readily cross the threshold of consciousness, and
as time proceeds, they seem very definitely to per-
tain to less superficial aspects of the psyche, to the
regions which normally are very difficult to contact
- the Creative and Archetypal Worlds of the ani-
mus, the almost exclusive concern in the past of
poets, mystics and magicians.
The fourth routine exercise, the Vibratory For-
mula, is fundamentally an extension of the Middle
Pillar visualisation. Its technique proceeds in a way
similar to the earlier exercise. But here we confront
a rationale of a different order. The theory here is
that by awakening a power or level of conscious-
74
ness within man's own sphere it is possible to con-
tact the corresponding force in the external world
or a similar level of perception and experience in
the Collective Unconscious. Its intent is not only
the development of the individual by rendering
him conscious of his other principles, but to trans-
form him into a willing vehicle and instrument of
the Universal mind, of that great and uniform sub-
stratum common to the whole of mankind. It is
within the power of man, by these methods, to as-
sociate himself with the almost omnipotent vitality
and spiritual value of those divine powers which
as an aggregate comprise the universe. It is the
first step towards what is colloquially termed
Adeptship, that path by which man is translated
into a voluntary co-worker with Nature in the
task of evolution.
The final exercise is Magic proper - the art of
Ceremonial Magic. By now it should be abun-
dantly clear that not all Magic is ceremonial; that
not necessarily does it proceed by way of ceremony
or ritual. Nor does it always require the usual para-
phernalia of robe, candle, incense and lodge-room.
There is much in Magic which is not too dissimilar
with the methods of meditation. That is to say, it
follows an interior route, and is a means of dealing
with the psyche by way of the actual psychologi-
cal instruments of psyche without reference to any
external object, syinbol, or piece of equipment. It
is the technique of an equilibriated introversion.
7S
Just as the exercises described above comprise
the second stage of Magic as analysis is the first, so
Ceremonial Magic as a distinct method is the third.
I will iterate that charlatans and misguided enthu-
siasts have done only too much to confirm general
opinion in the belief that Magic is sheer quackery,
but the earnest student who has applied faithfully
these fundamental principles, will, by his enriched
nature, bear testimony to its value, both therapeu-
tic and spiritual.
Ceremonial Magic has been misunderstood by
overzealous beginners principally because there has
been no general understanding of the principles
here laid down as rudiments of the work. Except
in the rare cases of those born with a definite flair,
it is quite impossible to succeed in Ceremonial
Magic until a great deal of development has been
obtained. And by development, I imply the awak-
ening or formulation within of the Sephiros of the
Tree of Life. Development implies the arousing of
the dormant power of the psyche. Above all else
it means the ascent into consciousness of the light
and love and wisdom of the higher Genius, the
YECHIDAH. Until that light shines above and
through the student, and the magical power is
operative within, Ceremony must remain what it
is for most people: a thing of habit and custom-
a set of observances perfunctorily to be performed,
celebrations in which there is no trace of virtue,
of value, of power.
The divine power once awakened, and the light
of the higher Self pouring through the mind, then
Ceremony appears in an entirely different guise.
It becomes a magical engine for the harnessing and
directing of the power and consciousness of the
psyche. Ceremony may be realised now as a means
of mobilising the hitherto unknown factors in
man's constitution, and employing them for vari-
ous ends, which depend entirely on man himself
and the extent of his knowledge and spiritual de-
velopment. Here is no place to utter portentous
warnings about the use and abuse of magical
powers and spiritual knowledge. Within the psyche
itself is a sentinel which never sleeps. It is a guar-
dian of the moral law whose punishment is so dire
and devastating that there is no appeal save by
expiation of crime. From the dicta and judgments
of this inner Self there is no escape, except through
the admission and the acceptance of the abuse,
followed by a grim determination for e;ver to avoid
a similar deed.
77

..-
CHAPTER THREE
RiOME years ago, the principles of this exer-
W cise of the Qabalistic Cross were published
. in my book THE TREE OF LIFE, and
I repeat the rubric as follows:
I. Touch the forehead, say ATOH (Thou art).
2. Bring the hand down and touch the breast,
say MALKUS (the Kingdom).
3. Touch the left shoulder, and say VE-GEDU-
LAH (and the Glory).
4- Touch the right shoulder and say VE-GE-
VURAH (and the Power).
s. Clasping the fingers on the breast, say LE-
OLAHM AMEN (forever, Amen).
The words employed are in the Hebrew tongue.
79
Hebrew is so employed because the magical sys-
tem first attained prominence in Europe since it
was adopted by some Jewish philosophers whom
we call Qabalists. Apart from this usage of Hebrew
words, there is not the slightest implication of He-
brew theology or philosophy. The gestures them-
selves are a variance of the ordinary Christian
Cross, making use of the last few phrases of the
Lord's prayer. That it is utilised in magical work
is due to the fact that it constitutes an ideal
method of equilibriating the personality and rais-
ing the mind to the contemplation of higher things.
The first name in the invocation is ATOH. This
is a Hebrew word meaning "Thou," the second
personal pronoun. To explain this in the simplest
possible way, may I say that there is some justifi-
cation in metaphysics for this usage. The reader
who has studied some philosophy will have noted
reference to a triad of concepts - such as the
thinker, the thing known, and the act or result of
cognition. The ancient authorities of the Qabalistic
philosophy conceived that the deepest or most
spiritual principle in man, which they argued was
man's highest notion of divinity, was just such a
triad of a thinker, knowledge, and the act of know-
ing. To each one of these principles or functions of
the higher Self, they therefore attributed a personal
pronoun as a symbol. The thinker, the YECHIDAH
itself, manifestly was "I." "Thou" was referred to
the thing known. And the third person "He" was
80
referred to the activity of the thinker - though
all three were considered an indissoluble unity. But
bearing in mind at all times the concept of the
middle way by which the extremes of the oppo-
sites may be avoided, they chose as the word to
express the higher Self in this slight ritual the
second pronoun "Thou."
The other words employed are names of Sephiros
on the Tree of Life. GEVURAH or POWER is
that centre numbered 5 on the diagram. GEDU-
LAH or MERCY is the fourth. These two are the
centres represented by the two lodge room Pillars,
the two opposites encountered in everyday life.
It is of these two centres that speaks the ritual in-
junction already quoted about unbalanced severity
being cruelty and oppression.
MALKUS is the loth Sephirah. It is translated
by the word "Kingdom" inasmuch as the ancients
considered that man's nature was a kingdom of
inconceivable extent, a kingdom of vast and wide
complexity, one having over it a divinely ordained
ruler, the YECHIDAH. The last phrase of the
Ritual is of little significance, save as it completes
the gesture. The word OLAHM means "forever."
But it can also mean "world" or "universe." We
would assume that it is so placed as a peroration
because within the miniature universe which is
man, there are innumerable elements and princi-
ples in constant activity, the entire ten Sephiros
of the Tree of Life.
81
If the reader will bear these brief explanations
in mind, the description of the rubric which follows
will be seen to have more significance than other-
wise might be the case.
ATOH is a reference to the higher Genius, the
It. MALKUS refers to the body, this with the
YECHIDAH being the dual expression of the liv-
ing human organism, the two expressions of the
Yang and the Yin, using these latter terms in their
widest connotation. GEVURAH and GEDULAH,
the two extremes of power as the highest aspects
of the ego, signify the two modes of that ego's.ca-
pacity for action and reaction. The final gesture,
closing on a point which is between these two ex-
tremes indicates the voluntary decision of the
evolving psyche to seek a balanced position, the
Middle Way, a place which partakes of both the
opposites and yet which is not subject to their
equal but opposing pulls.
It has been emphasised that the fundamental
task of both analytical psychology and Magic is
to attempt to bring into operation the higher
Genius - or to bring into full working conscious-
ness the content of the hidden and buried Uncon-
sciousness. We should remember the parables of
the archaic philosophical religions whose funda-
mental tenet was that within man was a spirit, a
dynamic centre of consciousness which, because of
its contact and association with matter, had been
plunged into a profound sleep, a state of somnam-
8z
bulism. The problem is: How may this slumbering
level of the primeval consciousness be awakened
within us? By endeavoring to extend the horizon
of consciousness, to enlarge the field of awareness
so as to embrace what previously was unconscious,
is obviously a logical method. To become aware of
all our actions, our thoughts and emotions and
unsuspected motives, to regard them in their true
light as actually they are and not as we would like
them to be or as we would wish the onlooker to
perceive them. It requires, to take this step, an
extraordinary degree of honesty and courage, both
indispensable virtues to the student of psychology
and Magic. The more of this suppressed and for-
gotten material stored in this at one time unknown
or dormant side of our nature that can be raised
into the clear light of the day, by exactly so much
do we awake from that inert stupor into which we
have in the past been plunged. And also, by just
that much do we liberate ourselves from the com-
pulsion to Nature's instinctual commands, and
become freed from what Levy Bruhl has called
the participation mystique. It is a phrase coined
to express that peculiar unity with nature which
primitive man felt and enjoyed, that participation
in the unconsciousness of nature which only be-
came disrupted as the evolution of mind made
itself apparent, a slinking serpent within the peace-
ful Garden of Eden. But mankind, despite thou-
sands of years of evolution, has not yet freed itself
83
as a whole from this subjection to the unconscious-
ness of Nature whereby it moves and feels without
deliberation and without conscious volition. Here
and there we do find an individual who has realized
the snare and burden in which he has lived, and
attempted accordingly to release himself from the
bonds in which he had been bound.
Any system, therefore, which recognizes these
deep unconscious levels of awareness and vitality,
insisting moreover upon that recognition, assists in
the evolution of mankind. The Qabalistic Cross,
so called, considered as a preamble to more serious
and difficult work, indicates just this awareness of
other levels of consciousness, and the necessity of
bringing them into operation within the human
psyche. Not only so, but it recognises that these
newly awakened levels of power and consciousness
may be deeply disturbing to the novice who at-
tempts this voyage of discovery. Therefore, what
is essential is that not only should they be awak-
ened, but that they should be recognised and equi-
lib ria ted in a balanced disposition. This also it is
the object of the Qabalistic Cross to accomplish.
One more word before proceeding to a descrip-
tion of the technique of its perfonnance. The tradi-
tion holds that these words should be vibrated and
not merely enunciated. That is to say, the student
must discover for himself that method of humming
or of pronouncing these words which will assist
in the production of a vibration. Some find that
84
these words uttered in a shrill voice is best adapted
to the requirements. Others, including the present
writer, have found through experiment and fre-
quent test that a moderately deep pitch, slightly
higher than the ordinary speaking voice, is most
suited to produce the desired vibration. Each sylla-
ble should be evenly vibrated, no one being ac-
cented at the expense of another. The test of the
vibration, strange though it may seem, is that it
should detonate in the palms of the hands and the
soles of the feet. When vibrating a word forcibly,
but not necessarily loudly~ a tingling sense should
be felt in every cell and nerve of the body, and it
should seem particularly that in the hands and
feet every atom and cell has become alive and is
in a state of rapid vibration. Little more than this
can be said in explanation without actual demon-
stration. But it is such a simple matter in which
to attain proficiency that no difficulty should be
experienced. The metaphysical theory involved
here is that by means of vibration, the actual for-
mation of the body-mind system may be changed
and renewed. That is to say, the proponents of the
system urge for a consideration of the fact that
within a period of seven years the body has under-
gone a complete biological change and, during that
time, has renewed its entire cell structure. It has
ejected old and deceased organisms, and by means
of the metabolic process, has built itself a new cell
organisation. The vibratory technique, therefore,
85
hastens the expulsion of dead tissue and unwanted
molecules and particles so that new ones being
absorbed into the system, whilst attention is de-
voted to expanding the field of consciousness, a
purified body is produced through which that
higher consciousness may more readily function.
It is principally a question of tactics. One could
on the one hand content oneself solely with the
task of widening the field of consciousness, alto-
gether to the exclusion of bringing the body sys-
tem within the scope of this purifying process. Or,
on the other hand, the entire time and attention
could be given solely to the production of certain
obscure bodily changes - as do some oriental
hath a yogis, to the exclusion and at the expense
of desirable factors of consciousness. Magic, very
sanely, combines the advantages of both points of
view, eliminating the dangerous and harmful fea-
tures common to the others. Always in a salutary
way is the path between the two extremes indicated.
When actually performing the Qabalistic Cross
it is well to face the East, the place of the rising of
the Sun. This takes advantage of a prevailing sym-
bolism which identifies the YECHIDAH with en-
lightenment and wisdom, a spiritual concept al-
ways determined by and defined in terms of Light.
It is from the East that the Light arises. Standing
motionless, with the eyes closed should that render
the act of reflection easier, endeavour to contem-
plate the nature of the YECHIDAH, that it is by
86
definition, the quintessence of light, life, love and
liberty, and that these are the qualities of the es-
sence of mind which is intrinsically pure.
One very essential point constantly requiring
recollection is that in the magical symbolism, as
well as in that of psychology, as has been demon-
strated, the various psychic principles have a spa-
tial co-relative in the human body. That is, certain
principles correspond to or have a special affinity
with certain organs or limbs of the body. This cer-
tainly is a fact within everybody's experience.
Emotion is almost always associated with the
heart, reason with the head, passion with the gen-
itals. The magical tradition simply classifies and
considerably extends this list of affinities.
Whilst considering the YECHIDAH, recognis-
ing that it represents freedom and that its nature
is light itself, the student should endeavour to
visualise just above the crown of his head a spheri-
cal form of Light. The diagram facing page 113
will indicate its likely position. The symbolism
places this above the head because, in the first
place, since the YECHIDAH is the -root of man's
consciousness, it is a principle of whose presence
the majority of us have never become really aware.
This is not to deny its existence, but only to affirm
our previous ignorance. Moreover, magical sym-
bolism, which incidentally is of the same type as
that employed by the Unconscious, also affirms
that this divine Genius, being the highest principle
87
within of which we still have no awareness, has not
yet fully incarnated within us. That is to say, it is
a potency which overshadows us - a principle
which the race will be able to realise fully only
some thousands of generations hence. The con-
sensus of experienced opinion has it, therefore, that
this overshadowing, no matter whether actual or
only metaphorical- does assuredly exist, and that
the psychic correlative of an overshadowing is a
centre just above the crown of the head. Fantastic
this certainly may sound at first. But I cannot
make any attempt to justify it or to defend it. And
were I called before a tribunal of intellectual criti-
cism, I would only recommend that the practice
be followed as a definite scientific experiment, and
the results experienced.
Let therefore the student consider his higher
and divine Genius, the core of his Unconscious, as
of the nature of Wisdom and Love and Light,
visualising its sphere of activity as having an af-
finity with the region immediately above the head.
Mter some seconds of this quiet recollection, let
him raise his hand above his head, then lower it
to the forehead and vibrate the first word ATOH
as though formally to affirm the presence of that
Genius. The hand employed should then be
brought in a straight line down to the region about
the diaphragm. Vibrate the word MALKUS. As
this is done, let the mind dwell on the fact that as
the hand descends, so does a stream of light de-
88
scend from above, a steady brilliant ray of light
permeating him through and through. A shaft of
light is thereby formed which extends from the
crown of his head to the soles of his feet. Strictly
speaking, MALKUS, the last Sephirah, is referred
to the feet. For convenience's sake, however, we
touch the breast or solar plexus with the mental
recognition that it is the region of the feet that
actually we have reference to and to which the
shaft of light is directed. This forms the first half
of the exercise. Some seconds pause should take
place here, in order to visualise and feel as strongly
as is possible the presence of a brilliant ray of light.
Then, shifting the attention from the central pil-
lar of Light to the left shoulder, let the student
consider that here is a reservoir of enormous power,
and vibrate the word ve-GEDULAH. A ray of
light should be commenced here in the imagina-
tion, and visualised to penetrate the breast until it
reaches the right shoulder, when the remaining
word ve-GEVURAH is vibrated. Thus is formu-
lated the horizontal shaft or the cross-bar of this
Cross of Light.
The first gesture traced a light-beam from head
to foot, while the second one traced the ray from
shoulder to shoulder. Interlocking the fingers on
the breast, and vibrating the final word le-OLAHM,
AMEN, the student should endeavour to see a
cross of light actually standing within him. None
89
but very few may hope at once to succeed in feel-
ing this, in obtaining the pulsing sensation of a
Cross of Light vibrating within. It will require
persistent and regular exercise before this sensation
makes itself apparent. It is a significant develop-
'ment, marking a definite stage in growth. Some
little preliminary practice in the art of visualisa-
tion may be necessary, as well as in acquiring the
ability of giving utterance to the Names so that
the sound appears to vibrate in a given spot. When
this is acquired a Name can be vibrated in the
head, the palms of the hand, in the thighs or feet,
or elsewhere at will. As skill is obtained, and the
sense of the Cross of Light becomes more marked
and definite, the opening practice can be extended.
That is to say, prior to visualising the center of
light above the head, the student should endeavour
to expand. the sphere of his consciousness. By this,
it is meant that he should try to imagine with eyes
closed that the body grows and grows until the
height increases enormously. Let him formulate in
his own mind that the physical form heightens to
such an extent that the head gradually touches
the ceiling, goes through the roof, and finally that
the semblance of a vast figure with head in the
clouds of space is obtained, the feet resting securely
on earth. In fact, from this exa.lted point of view,
the earth seems but a small globe beneath the feet.
Having obtained this sense of expansion, and it
may be accompanied by a heightened sense of con-
go
sciousness or of ecstasy, then let him visualize dur-
ing the first vibration that the ray of light descends
from the heavens upon his head, penetrating him
and eventually illumining the region of his feet
which are set firmly upon the earth. The sense of
expansion is a definite one, rendering the perform-
ance of the gestures of the Qabalistic Cross a much
more vital and significant experience.
The reasons given for the necessity of this astral
expansion lies in the fact that the ancient mystical
systems hold that the transcendental nature of
man, the essence of mind, is infinite in nature, a
positive void of which no quality can be predi-
cated. As one Eastern scripture puts it: "Learned
audience, the illimitable void of the universe is
capable of holding myriads of things of various
shapes and forms, such as the sun, the moon, the
stars, mountains, etc .... space takes in all these,
and so does the voidness of our nature. We say
that the essence of mind is great, because it em-
braces all things, since all things are within our
nature."
The instruction to expand consciousness, or to
formulate the astral form as of gigantic proportions
standing solitary in space, containing within itself
all the forces and worlds of the entire universe, is
a literal fulfilment of the above metaphysical pos-
tulate. Likewise, in some of the few Hermetic frag-
ments that we inherit, there is similar advice. In
fact, it states the technical process so excellently
91
that I am moved to reproduce it here: "Increase
thyself to immeasurable height, leaping clear of all
body, and surmounting all time, become eternal
and thou shalt know God. There is nothing im-
possible to thyself. Deem thyself immortal and
.able to do all things ... become higher than all
Height and lower than all Depth ... to be every-
thing at the same time in earth and sea and
heaven. Think that thou art as yet begotten, that
thou art in the womb, that thou art young, that
thou art old, that thou hast died and art beyond
death: perceive all these things together ... and
thou shalt know God. But if thou shuttest up thy
soul in thy body, and abasest thyself and sayest 'I
know nothing, I can do nothing, I am afraid of
earth and sea, I cannot mount to heaven, I know
not what I was or what I shall be;' then what hast
thou to do with God?" (Corpus Hermeticum xi.
[ii]). Something of the sort can be seen in the
writings of Plotinus. In any event, metaphysical
or psychological or nonsense, only constant prac-
tice will determine whether it has validity and
value, or whether these are simply delusions of
unbalanced minds. The final test must be a prag-
matic test; it is that of science itself.
It will now be seen why it was stated above that
this practice is essential to all magical work. In fact
it should precede or form part of any series of
mental exercises upon which one may embark. In-
asmuch as it does endeavour to ally the personality
9 2
with the true sources of life, permitting them in
any event a species of open channel to enter into
consciousness, no words can under-estimate or ex-
aggerate its importance. This is not to suppose that
at once will the casual performer of the Qabalistic
Cross become aware of the secret self of the Un-
conscious, "the flame which bums in the core of
every man." That is certainly not the implication
for he who runs may not read. What is implied
is that continuation in the way of regular practice
brings with it a recognition of the transcendental
self. Or, to put it in another way, a bridge is formu-
lated between the Conscious and the Unconscious,
permitting the mind to be made porous to diviner
things. Gradually and almost imperceptibly, the
student will become aware of the inspiration of
that higher Genius. The principal error on the part
of earlier writers on Magic - and my earlier liter-
ary efforts are also included within the scope of
these strictures - was that constantly they spoke
of ecstasy and divine illumination and transports
of spiritual delight. These experiences may be true
of the more advanced or evolved student. For the
average individual they can have but little mean-
ing. What actually does occur is that there is a
gradual connecting up of one level of consciousness
with another. This links on to another, and so
forth. Until finally, the every-day waking con-
sciousness becomes permeated with an awareness
of divine creative faculties which have fertilised its
93
intolerable barrenness. This awareness marks the
end of that interior sense of sterility and frustra-
tion. Here we have, in a word, the rationale of such
mystical phraseology as "union with God" the
"spiritual marriage," "alchemical nuptials," etc.
There is, to state it differently, a gradual engaging
of the clutch. By this method there is no violent
grinding of gears. There is only an imperceptible
and slow change-over to another speed, or rate of
vibration as it is called, to another mode of func-
tioning. The every-day wake-a-world conscious-
ness becomes more refined and sensitive, aware of
new possibilities, displaying an understanding of
and an insight into life and experience which it
never had before. A wide tolerance is developed.
And an all-inclusive sympathy for and concern in
man's problems is manifested where formerly there
was self-centredness and disinterestedness in any-
thing that did not touch upon personal problems.
These are tests, experiential facts open to all, facts
which are of value only to him in whom that in-
sight awakes by dint of persistent effort. For no
one else has it the least validity.
The Qabalistic Cross provides the preamble as
well as the peroration to another exercise. This is
named the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Penta-
gram. The rubric of it is as follows:
I. Perform the Qabalistic Cross.
2. Face East. Stretch out right hand holding
94
a dagger. Trace a Banishing Earth Penta-
gram. Vibrate the word YHVH. (Pro-
nounced Yod-heh-vav-heh).
3. Still holding out hand and dagger, tum to
the South. Trace another Pentagram in pre-
cisely the same way and vibrate the word
ADNI (Ah-doh-nai).
4. Then turn to the West and trace Penta-
gram. Vibrate AHIH (Eh-he-yeh).
5. Turn North. Trace Pentagram and vibrate
AGLA (Ah-ge-Iah).
6. Return to the East. Extend arms in the
form of Cross.
7. Say: "Before me Raphael."
8. "Behind me Gabriel."
9. "On my right hand Michael."
10. "On my left hand Auriel."
II. "For before me flames the Pentagram,"
IZ. "And behind me shines the Six-rayed Star."
13. Repeat the Qabalistic Cross.
The function of this ritual, though capable of
extension in several other directions, is pre-emi-
nently one of banishment. Its aim is to eliminate
from the sphere of the mind those qualities or
9S
sensations which the critical ego deems unneces-
sary. Its rationale is that a system of vibration
may act upon the human organism in a purifying
and strengthening way. Every molecule, every cell,
astral, mental and physical, is affected by this Rit-
ual, since the basis of every psycho-physical activ-
ity of man is grounded in these centres of energy
and spiritual force. These microscopic points, or
monads, are the minute sensative points of spiritual
consciousness - each of them a YECHIDAH or
It to its own particular system or small universe.
In the reality of their existence and function is
based the deepest sense of man's individuality, and
the basis of matter also. Mind and body are not
two separate things but dual manifestations of one
and the same unknown unit.
The result of the celebration of the Qabalistic
Cross, the vibration of the Divine Names, the for-
mulation of the four Pentagrams, and the invoca-
tion of the archangelic forms in the four quarters,
is that gradually coarser elements are ejected from
the sphere of sensation. To take their place other
particles, more sensitive and refined, of a higher
grade of spiritual substance, are attracted to the
personal sphere and become infused into the char-
acter and nature of the physical and psychological
constitution. The nature of these newly-acquired
particles is such as not to impede the free flow of
libido or of power and inspiration from the under-
¢
lying levels of the Unconscious to the superficial
awareness of man. In this way, a very real puri-
fication takes place, enabling the influence of the
higher Genius to penetrate the refined and porous
brain to diffuse throughout the personality a more
profound insight, and a keener zest and apprecia-
tion of life, and it bestows a greater ability to cope
with it.
The ritual itself is not a simple movement, but
is composed of several phrases. The first is that of
the Qabalistic Cross already explained. The second
consists of the tracing of a limiting circle, marked
at each of the four angles or cardinal quarters by
a Pentagram. Third, the invocation of the Arch-
angelic guardians. Fourth, the repetition of the
opening gesture.
Having expanded consciousness, and visualised
himself as a towering Cross of Light, let the student
face the East of his room, stretching before him his
right hand.- It is customary to employ a straight-
bladed dagger with a cross hilt, but this is rela-
tively unimportant for the novice; the fingers alone
being quite adequate to the work. To trace the
Pentagram bring the outstretched arm over to the
left side, to a point in front corresponding to just
about the middle of the thigh. Move the arm up-
wards to a point which would correspond to the
top of the head. Descend on the right to about the
middle of the right thigh. This movement will have
traced a large inverted "V", about three feet high,
97
Move the outstretched arm over towards the
left to slightly above the left shoulder. Then carry
it horizontally to a point just above the right shoul-
der and then diagonally downwards to the point
originally started from. Difficult and complex it
may sound, but in practice it is very easy. If a
five-pointed star is drawn on paper, it will be seen
at a glance what the import of the above directions
are. They have been delineated at length above
because, incredible as it seems, the writer has found
some individuals performing the most outrageous
gestures in the belief that they were tracing Penta-
grams. The only point to remember is to make a
fairly large figure, about three feet high, and above
all that it should be a well proportioned Penta-
gram, and not a deformed or eccentric one. Some
little practice may be required to achieve this,
especially in making the final diagonal so as to
complete the gesture exactly where the initial
ascending line began.
This is all straight-forward enough. But this is
the mere physical aspect of the exercise. In prac-
tice something more is demanded of the practi-
tioner. While tracing these Pentagrams with his
98
arm outstretched, his visualising faculty must be
active and alert. He must endeavor to imagine
these four pentagrams as flaming figures of a
bluish-golden hue similar to that produced by
igniting methylated spirit. After completing the
physical tracing of the figure, he should be able
to perceive by the mind's eye, with the eyes closed,
the Pentagrams flaming quite vividly in front of
him. Naturally this requires much practice. And
save for him whose faculty of visualisation is al-
ready very well developed, it is, unfortunately, a
faculty not easily come by. Only exertion and con-
tinual practice will develop this.
Thus the first stage of the Ritual is the visualisa-
tion of the Pentagram while actually tracing it with
finger or dagger. When the commencing point of
each Pentagram has been returned to, let the stu-
dent pause, and, imagining a central point in that
figure, bring up his arm to that centre, stabbing or
charging it energetically with outstretched dagger.
It is at this juncture that the Divine Name should
be vibrated, slowly and evenly. It suffices to vi-
brate each Name but once. Each of these four
Names associated with a Pentagram in a different
cardinal quarter has to be vibrated in precisely the
same way as was directed for those names con-
nected with the Qabalistic Cross. It should be en-
deavoured to feel them operating within. Also
visualise that as they are vibrated, the power of
the Name travels out through the Pentagram's
99
center to the end of that particular cardinal quar-
ter. This procedure is to be followed in each quar-
ter, the only variation being the different Name
employed.
It will be noted that each of these Names is com-
prised of four letters each. In the mystical system
of the ancients each was attributed to one of the
four elements or the four modes of activity com-
prising our make-up, and the Ritual has direct
effect upon these. It would take too long and serve
no good purpose to dilate upon the reason why
these Names were supposed to be effectual, and
why certain Names were associated with certain
quarters and not to others. Suffice here to say that
the tradition has found them effectual for the pur-
pose under consideration, and the experimental
work of modern students has confirmed this psy-
chological association. The student desirous of
delving more deeply into the subject, wishing to
discover the system by which symbolic names are
attributed to certain quarters or to the Ten
Sephiros, will find much material in The Tree of
Life and My Rosicrucian Adventure, as well as in
The Golden Dawn.
The last Pentagram having been traced in the
North, the student returns, still holding arm with
dagger outstretched, to the East where he started
from. With his arms extended to form a Cross, and
being aware about him of the four Pentagrams
100
vitali sed by the vibration, he now commences a
further phase of the ritual. Here is demanded of
him the visualisation of the vast archangelic figures
standing behind each pentagram, as though the
latter were a sort of flaming shield supported by
those magical or telesmatic images.
Some word or two needs to be expressed about
Archangels and Angels. Most readers, unfamiliar
with the nomenclature and general tenets of the
magical philosophy, may feel inclined to baulk at
this juncture. The postulate, however, is quite a
logical one. For the philosophy of Magic conceives
of one root source from which all life sprang, one
fundamental life current, infinite and omnipresent,
expressing itself in diverse ways. This we can call
if we wish, God, libido, the Collective Unconscious
- depending upon what system of religion or
metaphysic we subscribe to. Within this universal
Life are archetypal images - nodal points which
act as termini or power stations through which, as
it were, the root life-stream flows and is diluted or
transmuted so as to Jte assimilable or available to
a lower form of life. These primordial archetypes
of the Collective Unconscious are the psychic
"forms into which repeated ancestral experiences
have moulded the typically human mode of appre-
hension." Generally speaking then, these primor-
dial archetypes, man's first definition of the mani-
fold forces of nature, comprise what in Magic we
mean by Gods and Archangels and Angels.
101
One very clever expositor, referring to the man-
ner in which the ancient magicians conceived of
these archetypes or magical images, expresses the
idea thus: "They took each factor in Nature and
personified it, gave it a name, and built up a sym-
bolic figure to represent it; just as British artists
have by their collective efforts produced a stand-
ard Britannia, a female figure with shield charged
with the Union Jack, a lion at her feet, a trident in
her hand, a helmet on her head, and the sea in the
background. Analysing this figure as we would a
Qabalistic symbol, we realize that these individual
symbols in the complex glyph have each a signifi-
cance - in fact, an occult glyph is more akin to a
coat of arms than anything else. • . • A magical
figure is the coat of arms it represents. These magi-
cal figures are built up to represent the different
modes of the manifestation of cosmic force in its
different types and on its different levels. They
are given names, and the initiate thinks of them
as persons, not troubling himself about their meta-
physical foundations ..•. An angelic being, then,
may be defined as a cosmic force whose apparent
vehicle of manifestation to psychic consciousness
is a form built up by the human imagination."
When facing East, therefore, and vibrating pow-
erfully the name RAPHAEL, the student should
attempt to build up in his imagination, or to visu-
alise a vast Angelic figure, conceived of in the
traditional conventional style, of vibrating yellow
10Z
and mauve hues. The whole figure, the visualisa-
tion complete, will be gracious and slight and airy,
and the mauve which touches up and brings out
the vivid pale yellow will cause the robes to flash
and shimmer, giving the impression of shot silk.
It may also appear that a gentle breeze is wafted
from behind the figure.
In the South, the archangelic form to be imag-
ined will have a predominance of flaming red,
touched here and there by vivid flashes of emerald
green. In the hand of the figure will be seen an
uplifted sword of steel, while little tongues of fire
will lick the browned earth about the bare feet.
An intense radiation of heat should be sensed from
Michael.
Watery characteristics will mark the nature of
GABRIEL in the West, and blue offset by orange
will be its colour. A blue chalice of water will be
held aloft by the telesmatic figure, which will some-
times seem as though it were standing in a rushing
stream of clearest water. Sometimes, it may seem
as though there were a small waterfall behind the
figure, pouring cascades of water into the Temple
or room.
In the North, the angel AURIEL will appear to
be standing on very fertile ground, grasses and
wheat being about the feet. Sheaves of corn will be
held in both the outstretched hands, and on the
whole, the prevailing colours will be a mixture of
citrine, olive, russet, and some little black.
103
The technique of here employing these teles-
matic or magical figures of the Archangels, once
the appropriate names have been vibrated and
some realisation obtained of the presence of the
correct type of spiritual power flowing through the
figure, is to imagine that the emanation from the
Archangel penetrates and cleanses the personality.
That is to say, in the East from behind the arch-
angel RAPHAEL should be felt a gentle wind or
breeze which, permeating the entire body, blows
from it every trace of impurity. From MICHAEL
in the South, warmth at first of gentle degree
should be felt, increasing in intensity to a power-
ful heat which bums and utterly consumes every
blemish which troubled the personality. This purg-
ing should be felt as consecrating one to the serv-
ice of the higher Self. The same technique should
be applied to GABRIEL in the West, except that
one is purified with water, while in the North one
is invested with the stability and fertility of
AURIEL, Archangel of the Earth.
Of course this sounds a most complex and com-
plicated procedure to pursue. But with practice,
the entire exercise will be found to be easy. First of
all, the student should recognise that a wise man
knows how to limit himself. He will limit himself
at the start to obtaining mastery of the mechani-
cal part of the Ritual without reference to the
initiated technique. That is to say, his aim should
be to commit the ritual to memory so completely
104
that at any particular quarter there is no groping
for the appropriate names. Then each phase should
be studied separately until skill and ease are
achieved. He should apply himself to familiarising
himself with the sense of expansion of conscious-
ness and visualising the descending ray of light
which formulates itself into a vast radiant cross
within him. A certain degree of accomplishment
gained in this exercise, and already being skilled
in the tracing of perfectly geometrical pentagrams
in mid-air, the next task is to obtain about him a
clear formulation of the blazing pentagrams, vivified
by the vibration of the appropriate divine Names
being hurled through them. Application to the
technique of purification by means of again ex-
panding consciousness, whilst surrounding himself
with the colossal magical figures of the archangels
comprises the next important stage. The final task
is to visualise, before performing the Qabalistic
Cross again, a pentagram of fire burning on the
breast. Seen on the back is a hexagram, its ascend-
ing triangle being red in colour, and its descending
triangle of blue, both triangles to be interlaced.
I hope the student will not be frightened by this
mass of directions, for he can be assured that the
exercise is not nearly as obscure or terrifying as it
sounds. Practice will make perfect, and the realisa-
tion of the goal to be acquired will provide suf-
ficient confidence to enable him to pursue the
practice still further until complete mastery is
achieved. lOS
In this way, his mind being made quiescent, and
his body and emotional apparatus purified, the
consciousness of the hidden grades or levels of his
being may gently and gradually ascend and mani-
fest to his perceptions, thus assisting him in his
inward growth, in the conquest of ignorance and
the acquisition of self-knowledge.
Before closing this chapter, one final set of direc-
tions remains to be communicated with regard to
this practice. Once skill has been acquired in per-
forming accurately and effectuaIIy this Lesser Ban-
ishing Ritual of the Pentagram, the student may
endeavour to perform the entire ritual in his mind.
Seating himself comfortably in his chair, facing
East, he should endeavour, without so much as
rising or without any audible vibration of the
words, to expand the form of his sphere of sensa-
tion and bring down the light of the Higher Self
upon him. He ought also to be able to imagine
himself as standing, moving forward to the East
and tracing the Pentagrams without moving the
physical arm, silently or mentally vibrating the
appropriate magical words. Likewise with the
Archangels. The mere determined effort to visual-
ise them and mentally pronounce their names will
call up the figures, and evoke the type of force
which should flow through them.
My sole caution is against attempting what ob-
viously is an advanced practice until literally
months have been spent working away at the
106
physical performance of this exercise. The writer
knew some people who neglected to take this piece
of sound advice. Their work became very careless
and slapdash, and whatever advantage was to be
obtained from the ritual was never forthcoming.
This astral ritual is, as I have said, an exercise to
be undertaken only when a good deal of mental
stability and control has been obtained - results
which follow from persistent application, two or
three times a day for many weeks or months, to an
enthusiastic and vigourous performance of the
Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram. Sudden
spurts of enthusiasm followed by prolonged bouts
of inactivity avail nothing in magical work. In
fact, such an attitude towards the subject is indi-
cative in itself of, if not neurosis, then of a very
powerful conflict raging in the Unconscious. It in-
dicates that the opposites are still operative within
the mental sphere, and that the Golden Flower of
stability and equilibrium has not yet begun to
blossom. The student would do well to become
fully aware of the conflict, determining to be af-
fected neither by violent enthusiasms nor by
equally violent depressions. Above all, he should
perform quietly and patiently the Banishing Ritual.
Let him continue steadfast, with courage and equa-
nimity, in the daily celebration of his chosen work
107

CHAPTER FOUR
OT IS my confirmed belief that several weeks
U at the very least of patient application to
, the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Penta-
gram should precede any effort to perform the
Middle Pillar. For one thing, it will have trained
the student in several little tricks of routine and
magical technique quite apart from the intrinsic
virtues of the exercise, which is to purify and
cleanse the entire sphere of personality to the end
that the hi.gher Self may manifest through a puri-
fied body and mind. If the exercise has been la-
boured at for two or three months, performing it
two or three times during the course of each day,
the student will approach the further stages of
Magic well-prepared, quite able to cope with and
accommodate the increased vitality and power
which will pour through him.
I t will be realised how necessary analysis is as a
preliminary routine to Magic. The student should
109
have arrived at a fair understanding of himself,
his motives, and the mechanism of his mind, and
integrated himself more or less thoroughly so that
no dissociation or serious neurosis exists within the
psyche. For the presence of a powerful complex
of associated ideas in the Unconscious, or a marked
dissociation splitting off one part of the psyche
from the other, will have the effect of short-cir-
cuiting the flow of energy generated or released by
the Middle Pillar. An explosion in the form of a
complete nervous breakdown, or even of the de-
struction of mental stability, will be a likely result.
Many instances have been known of unprepared
students contracting fatal physical illnesses through
attempting .work of this nature, though this is
more true where Eastern exercises have been un-
wisely attempted. Some of these unfortunates,
when the dissociation was rendered complete, have
succumbed to chronic melancholia or taken their
own lives. These warnings are not intended to be
portentous or terrifying, but only to impress upon
the student the solemnity of these undertakings,
a journey of self-conquest than which nothing
could compare in importance or seriousness.
To my mind, the exercise described as the Mid-
dle Pillar is the groundwork of all actual develop-
mental work. It is a process which is the basis of
Magic. That this has been but seldom realised is
obviously at the root of the futile attempts to do
Ceremonial and perform Ritual, of which the gen-
IIO
eral public hears every now and again. Even stu-
dents of Magic of many years standing have been
guilty of negligence in this respect, and also in fail-
ing to recommend it to their successors.
The name of the exercise is taken from the posi-
tion of the central Sephiros on the diagrammatic
1'ree of Life. This exercise concerns those centres
numbered 1,6,9 and 10. It also includes the shad-
owy centre drawn in dotted lines, placed between
3 and 4- For various reasons I cannot go into de-
tailed metaphysical explanations as to the under-
lying philosophy of this shadowy Sephirah, though
students who desire more information about it will
discover the elaboration of this theme in my
Garden of Pomegranates and My Rosicrucian
Adventure. Suffice to say here that it arises from
a consideration of the process of evolution on the
one hand, and the two pillars previously referred
to, on the other. The ancient philosophers who de-
veloped this system believed that as man evolved,
that is to say as he developed sufficient control
over his emotions as to be able to remain poised in
a detachment from the dual pull of the opposites,
so there developed within him a new faculty of
discrimination and spiritual discernment. Psycho-
logically this idea has been verified. For it has been
said that as the over activity of the superficial
mind, the flitting from one thing to another, pre-
vents creativeness, so equally does inertia, dull-
ness and the unwillingness to move. In fact, any
IXI

of the two extremes or opposite modes of behav-
iour or thinking are characteristic of the unevolved
man. As was said by one Magician "The Secret of
Wisdom can be discerned only from the place of
balanced power"- that is from between the two
Temple Pillars. Poise at a third point, which neu-
tralises to some extent the violence of the swing
of the psychic pendulum from one extreme to the
other, is the result of cultivating equanimity, rep-
resenting an equal capacity to be either at rest or
active, interested or withdrawn at will, and not
from emotional compulsion.
This central point between the two symbolic pil-
lars of the opposites, the place of baianced power
from which the working of the opposites may cor-
rectly be viewed, is the implication of DAAS,
which is the name of this shadowy Sephirah.
Rightly it is shadowy, and the word is used ad-
visedly for in the majority of us who have not
cultivated the difficult art of avoiding the oppo-
sites, the development of this new principle has
proceeded with the utmost slowness. It is a new
factor of adaptation or equilibrium~ especially be-
tween the two broad divisions of consciousness-
the ego on the one hand with its desire for adjust-
ment to modern life with its refined and non-na-
tural conditions, and on the other hand with the
superficial levels of the instinctual life, concerned
with primitive things, of self-assertion and the un-
bridled gratification of its every whim and caprice.
113
It is this new factor of adjustment which com-
prises the principal impetus to what has been
variously called in the East the Golden Flower,
and in mediaeval Europe the growth of the Red
Rose upon the Cross of Gold. It is the Stone of
the Philosophers, the medicine of metals.
To the four central Sephiros plus the shadowy
DAAS as the fifth, are attributed divine names-
which, as in the former exercise, are to be vibrated
powerfully in conjunction with the imaginative
formulation of various images.
Let me expatiate upon these divine Names by
stating that they may be considered as the key-
note or vibratory rates of various degrees or grades
of consciousness. In their prolonged investigation
into the hidden knowledge and the secret side of
man's nature, the ancients who were as empirical
scientists as our psychologists today, came to asso-
ciate various sound-values or rates of vibration
with various parts of the body, and also with par-
ticular types of magnetic force and strata of con-
sciousness. No religious or metaphysical theory
need attach to the employment of these names.
The system rests entirely upon its own merits. The
simplest way of regarding them is, as explained
above, as vibratory rates. Again, they may be con-
sidered as key notes by means of which access is
obtained to the consciousness of the different parts
of our being, the existence of which hitherto we
have been kept in ignorance.
114
With each of these five centres there is associated
a divine Name to be used as a vibratory formula.
The attributions as we have received them, to-
gether with the traditional name of the Sephiros,
are given below with the names of the principles
active in the human psyche. The numberings are
those that appear on the Tree.
I. Keser YECHIDAH
AHIH (pronounced Eh-he-yeh)
Daas The Link
YHVH ALHIM (Ye-hoh-voh E-loh-heem)
6. Tipharas RUACH
YHVH ALOAH ve-DAAS
(Ye-hoh-voh El-oah ve-Da-as)
9. Yesod NEPHESCH
SHADDAI AL CHAI (Shah-dai El Chai)
10. Malkus BODY
ADNI HARTZ (Ah-doh-nai ha-Ah-retz)
The divine Names and the names of the Sephiros
should naturally be committed to memory, as also
the following scheme of their position or relation to
parts of the human frame.
KESER, the first Sephirah, is a centre of Light,
and in the Qabalistic Cross, it is attributed to a
centre posited slightly above the crown of the
head. It refers to that higher Genius or It which,
lIS
not yet fully incarnated within, broods above, a
silent watcher. It is for each of us the source of
inspiration and freedom and enlightenment. It is
life itself.
DAAS, the shadowy Sephirah, which develops
in the course of evolution as we learn the domi-
nation of our mental and emotional propensities,
is situated at the nape of the neck. Its position is
at a point on the spine just below the occiput, about
one or two inches above the larynx, and its diam-
eter may be imagined to be about four inches in
extent. It is conceived to be a symbolic link, self-
induced and self-devised, between the higher
Genius 00 the one hand, and on the other, the ego,
the conscious self referred to that group of char-
acteristics clustered around TIPHARAS.
On the Middle Pillar, DAAS connects the higher
faculties to the ego, KESER to TIPHARAS. This
latter Sephirah is resident in the neighborhood of
the heart, and its sphere extends from the dia-
phragm or solar plexus more or less to the spine.
Its centre may be imagined to be the lowest point
of the sternum or breast-bone to which the ribs
are attached, its diameter being about six inches.
Below TIPHARAS is YESOD, a centre which
is referred to the region occupied by the genera-
tive organs, and its size should be visualised as of
the same dimensions as TIPHARAS. The final
centre is MALKUS, referred to the feet, and it
II6
will be found by experience that the ankles com-
prise the periphery of a visualised sphere about
four inches or so in diameter, the center being the
sole of the foot.
The method of working this practice called the
Middle Pillar is to stand upright, hands to side,
eyes closed, breath being inhaled and expired
steadily. Above all the mind should be quiet, calm
and still. When familiarity with the exercise is
obtained, it may be performed sitting or lying
down. These preliminary conditions being fulfilled,
let the student begin by transferring his attention
to that region immediately above the crown of his
head, where he should endeavour to visualise a
sphere of white brilliance. To accomplish this may
take some little while. Several attempts may be
required before any realisation of this centre oc-
curs. But when it has been obtained, let it be re-
garded with a certain sense of devotion, and
contemplated as being the spatial correlative or
correspondence of the vital core of his being. This
devotional attitude should enliven it considerably,
and the sense of light and power, the first avenues
of sense by which this higher phase of conscious-
ness may be grasped, should increase wholly be-
yond anticipation. At this juncture let him vibrate
three or four times, slowly, the name EHEIEH.
This is a Hebrew divine Name meaning "I AM"
(or more accurately "I WILL BE") a statement
which in reality is all that one can truthfully say
II7
of the Self. Every other characteristic and quality
belongs not to its own intrinsic nature but to the
vehicles and sheaths of consciousness through
which it functions.
Steadfast in the contemplation of this source of
power and enlightenment, he should endeavour to
feel that an all-penetrant beam of brilliance is
emitted downwards towards the nape of the neck.
Here it widens, expanding to form a brilliant centre
similar to, though smaller in diameter than, that
above the head. Applying the same vibratory tech-
nique here, while realising that this is not his di-
vinity but its conscious link or point of contact
with his ego, the student should again feel the
radiation of power and vitality. So marked and
powerful should this become at this juncture that
even in the palms of his hand will the vibration of
energy be felt as almost of a physical nature, and
quite possibly a prickling sensation will be noticed
in the head and neck. A quite indescribable sense
of poise and mental quiescence should also be ex-
perienced - no inconsiderable attainment, no small
acquisition in these days of hurried business life
and social fluttering.
After several vibrations of the appropriate name,
again the beam of light should descend to the heart
or region of the solar plexus, and from there a
warmth and a quite different sense of power will
gently radiate as though from an interior sun.
Here too, a Name should be slowly vibrated in such
lIS
a way, which can only come through practice, as
to detonate precisely in the physical area being
contemplated and not in another. It must be felt
to vibrate in the region between the diaphragm
and the point opposite to it on the spinal column.
Pass in contemplation from the heart to the cen-
tre of the generative organs. Visualise the sphere
of light and vibrate the Name, employing the same
technique as before and noting carefully the reac-
tion in consciousness. Some minutes having been
spent arousing this centre and vitalising it with
power, pass downwards to the feet where the magi-
cal centre will be found to awaken quite easily. In
point of fact, it will be discovered that the mere
contemplation of KESER, the centre above the
head, will by reflex action bring into operation the
MALKUS centre, these being the two poles, height
and depth, of the Middle Pillar.
This very briefly is the technique. Little can be
said which the zealous student will not be able to
discover through application to it. If the student
spends about five minutes in the contemplation
of each Sephirah on the middle column, the exer-
cise will take approximately twenty-five minutes
to half an hour. And surely there is no one so busy
today who cannot devote at least one half hour a
day to the task of self-mastery, to the cultivation
of spiritual insight, and in the quest of his own
divine nature.
My own plan of personal instruction, one de-
II9
veloped some three years ago, was to perform this
exercise sitting beside that student I had decided
to teach. The principle involved was that of induc-
tion. I assumed that by bringing into operation the
centres within my own sphere 'of sensation while
sometimes, though not invariably, holding the
hand of the student, the unawakened centres of
the latter would react and revolve out of sympa-
thy, or by reflex. It amounted, in a word, to a sort
of initiation, and powerful it may become too. And
I discovered that whereas the average student
took some while before stumbling upon the best
means of producing the desired results by the
Middle Pillar, those few students whom I had ini-
tiated in this way were capable of performing the
exercise immediately after in a highly successful
way, even when away from my presence and
atmosphere.
When seeking for the ideal technique of initia-
tion, to perfect a rite of initiation from a purely
individualistic point of view, one of the methods
I hit upon was the combination of the Middle Pil-
lar formula with an actual Ceremony. That is to
say, by ceremonially invoking a spiritual force by
means of the appropriate pentagram or hexagram
ritual, vibrating congruous divine Names, and per-
forming the Middle Pillar in a room or Temple
thus powerfully charged by the manifestation of
this spiritual force, the result was all the more ef-
fectual and definitely realised in consciousness.
120
A simple ceremony which invokes the divine and
archangelic currents of elemental force, using invo-
cations composed of ecstatic passages from various
sacred Scriptures, is almost ideal for the purpose.
Not only does this method succeed in providing a
neophyte with an introduction to the light of his
own higher Genius and to the realm of magic, but
it is a supreme technique of self-initiation. Various
changes may be rung on a simple theme. And ac-
cording to the student's own ingenium and spiritual
aspiration, so will he devise several methods of em-
ploying the techniques I have described above.
There will be some who will propound bela-
boured theories as to suggestion - that because I
consciously or otherwise suggested to these stud-
ents that there were magical centres existent within
their own system, their Unconscious accepted the
suggestion and produced the looked-for result.
Others, yet again, will murmur the magical word
"telepathy" - arguing that I projected, though
not necessarily deliberately, certain ideas or sensa-
tions from my mind into that of the receptive
student who thus was influenced against his own
better judgment or scepticism. With none of these
am I wholly in accord, though in each of them may
be some germ of truth. None of them answer the
facts of experience. And I can only suggest that
these peopl~ would do far better to apply them-
selves zealously to a little experimental work rather
I21
than waste time in vain explanations and baseless
theories.
Some will note that this exercise corresponds in
some ways to the Yoga chakra system. There is,
assuredly, correspondence. But there are several
·very important differences and variations. The
first, a minor difference, is the number and position
of the centres involved. But this does not require
discussion. What is fundamental, however, is the
entirely different approach. The Yoga technique
commences its meditations from the lowest chakra
and works upwards to the Sahasrara above the
head. On the other hand, in the Western system,
the Middle Pillar starts from the highest and works
downwards. In a word, the Western ideal is not to
escape from the body but to become involved more
and more in life, in order to experience it more ade-
quately, and in order to obtain a mastery over it.
The ideal is to bring down godhead so that one's
manhood being enriched may thereby be assumed
into godhead. Always does this system begin from
the real centre of working - the higher Genius
which, by definition, is in contact eternally with
whatever infiinite deity there may be. That is to
say, through the YECHIDAH we have immediate
access to all the dynamic inspiration and spiritual
power of the Collective Unconscious. r"
By the magical hypothesis, the higher Genius
corresponds within man to the possible relationship
of God to the universe. That is to say, man being
122
the microcosm of the macrocosm, a reflection of
the cosmos, is a universe within himself, a universe
ruled and governed by his own divinity. So what-
ever magical work is undertaken must always be
in accordance with the dictates and under the sur-
veillance of that higher Genius. And since, at first,
there is no immediate method of realising whether
any particular magical effort has the approval, to
state it simply and naively, of the higher Self, the
sole course of action must be for the student to
place himself in alignment with that Genius. This
is done by invoking it at the outset of any magical
operation, and trusting to be made a vehicle of
wisdom and understanding. The first movement of
the Middle Pillar - as also the Qabalistic Cross,
which is a quick method of obtaining the same re-
sult - achieves precisely that. For since the source
of life and love has always been conceived of as
light, the preliminary step is to perceive that
brooding brilliance above which is the emanation
of, or the direct centre through which manifests,
that higher Genius, or with which the latter is in
especial sympathy. And the remaining steps are
deliberately to open one's manhood as it were to
the descent of divinity - to bring down the light
into the personality. Here it must be emphasised
lies the vital distinction between the Yoga chakra
system of the Hindus and the magical exercise of
the Middle Pillar. At first such a descent is char-
acterised by an increased sense of power and vital-
12 3
ity. Gradually this widens to emotional quiescence
and control with a mental poise, followed by a
gradual broadening and enhancement of the en-
tire mental horizon.
There is yet another highly useful application of
this formula. It is to the art of healing that I refer.
Formerly when I employed massage and magnetic
healing in my professional work I found the Mid-
dle Pillar and the spiritual energy that it generates
and makes available of inestimable value. Cases of
nervous exhaustion, catarrh, constipation, incipient
consumption, pleurisy, and many another will re-
spond in an incomparable manner to this combina-
tion of massage and the willed communication of
power. That is to say, using effleurage and friction,
especially on the spine, as the principal massage
technique one should place oneself en rapport with
the higher Self by the contemplation of the centre
of light above the head. By silently vibrating the
divine Name appropriate, one is enabled to tap a
tremendous source of healing power which is in-
finitely greater than that which ordinarily one has
at one's disposal as an average human being. This
magnetic or spiritual power flows through one
steadily and powerfully. Directed by a calm will,
and assisted by a clear visualised idea of the result
desired, it may be communicated like- an electric
current through the arm and hands to the finger
tips. Thence it enters the patient's body as the
palms of the masseur's hands glide over the surface
124
being treated. It requires some little practice to
retain awareness of this divine Light while engag-
ing in so strenuous a physical effort as deep mas-
sage, but it is not an impossible one. It is a great
help if the visualisation of the sphere above the
head is attempted whilst walking, for example.
When this can be done, then its employment for
the purposes of healing is quite simple. I can com-
mend it unequivocally, both to physicians and
psychologists. It is my hope that analysts will take
over the technique for use in their own consulting
rooms. Let them adopt it in its entirety as the one
ideal method of inducing the right state of mind
appropriate to free association and the cathartic
confession. Should its present form be considered
unsuitable, I reiterate that it has possibilities which
render it worthy of being remodelled in the light
of present-day psychological knowledge to suit
modem contingencies.
There are several little physical helps which
greatly enhance the degree and amount of power
which can be made available. Correct breathing,
especially, is one of them. There could hardly be
a better adjunct than breathing in a rhythmical
manner. The latter in itself, quite apart from the
Middle Pillar, is supremely efficacious in producing
quiet and calm. The entire system is stilled and
strengthened as the lungs slowly take up a rhythm,
and keep to it indefinitely.
First of all the student" should train himself in
125
the method of breathing correctly - that is to say,
in the method of filling his lungs with air from the
very bottom. He should combine abdominal with
both diaphragmatIc and costal breathing. The act
of inspiration, if carefully observed, consists of
these three phases. First t~e abdominal part of the
lungs are filled, then that underlying the dia-
phragm, and finally as the shoulders are slightly
lifted the thorax itself becomes filled. They are so
continuous as to appear an undivided act. In this
way, every cell of the entire lung surface comes
into contact with the oxygen inhaled, which is thus
passed into the blood-stream. Most of us usually
breathe very insufficiently, only a fraction of the
cellular surface of the lung coming into contact
with the inhaled air. Thus there is always a large
quantity of residual air in the lower reaches of the
lungs. There is always a large surface of the lung
area which is not employed; and a quantity of
carbon dioxide and cells in an impoverished state
of health are ever' present.
This method of breathing introduces a far
greater content of oxygen into the lung, destroying
therefore, by combustion, toxins and undesirable
elements, and also producing a better state of
health. There are many individuals who, because
of conflict and neurosis, have attempted to flee
from life. They have attempted to evade a full
contact with the stream of vital experience, and
this psychological attitude of evasion has reacted
126
upon the bodily functions. One of these particu-
larly affected is that of breathing, the lungs falling
into the habit of functioning at about half their
proper capacity. The circle is a vicious one. For
inadequate breathing by itself induces an enfeebled
state of health, perpetual exhaustion, catarrh, and
many another ill. Likewise, this constant state of
ill-health reacts upon the mental outlook, confirm-
ing and strengthening the escapist attitude towards
life because the individual is now only half alive,
incapable of reacting to the pleasures and joys
of life. For mind and body, as so often reiterated
in these pages, are not two distinct units. The
functions of the one interlap with and interpene-
trate the functions of the other. More accurately
they should be regarded as the two functions of
one entity, two methods whereby it may acquire
experience. Too much therefore cannot be said of
the necessity for cultivating the lungs to operate
at full capacity. This cultivation cannot be too
often stressed, for life is power, and power is life
and consciousness, indispensable in the path of
Magic which leads to the knowledge of the higher
Self.
The proper method of deep breathing having
been acquired, the cultivation of a rhythmic breath
should be the next step. The most suitable and
simple method is the four-beat rhythm. If the
student will inhale very slowly, mentally counting
one, two, three, four and then exhale to the same
127
beat, he will discover that this undoubtedly is the
best rhythm for inducing that state of calmness
and peace which is so necessary for meditation and
refiection. And, in passing, let me add that the
state of quiescence sought after is one not of pas-
sivity and negativity. It is one of alertness and
eagerness. What one should cultivate is a quies-
cence in which every mental faculty is alert, wait-
ing to be used. A tranquility characterised by a
sense of enormous power and capacity is the state
to be aimed at, one in which there is the maximum
of awareness and inner poise.
Success in the technique of the rhythmic breath
is an unmistakable symptom which cannot fail to
be recognised when it arises. There is first the sense
of peace, satisfaction and quiet joy, without the
least cessation of one's mental capacity. Next fol-
lows a ,Sense of vibration felt allover the ~ody, as
though every cell and molecule were acting in
unison and moving, as it were, in a single direction.
The result of this vibration is to transform the
lungs and the entire body into a single storage
battery, generating and storing electricity and
power, transmuting them into will and faculty.
Hard upon this, if the rhythm be persisted in,
comes a quiet ripple over the diaphragm or sola.r
plexus - a difficult symptom to describe, because
it produces no perceptible physical or recognisable
change, though the sense of the rhythm is none the
less distinctly felt. When this occurs, and when
uS
one becomes aware of a single vibration through
the body, and a gentle vibration or sense of lumin-
osity and lightness in the brain, the student may
be assured that he has achieved success in this
particular practice.
This state gained, the Middle Pillar should be
proceeded with, and the Names could be silently
vibrated in tune with the rhythmic inhalation and
exhalation of the breath. The sense of the brilliance
above which I prefer to think of as the ''lamp
above the head," or as others have called it "the
candle of vision," becomes much more perceptible
and marked. Very often it develops into an aware-
ness of a whirling sphere of fiery light radiating
peace and illumination into the mind and body.
Little more need be said, for I have no desire to
provide material which may act upon suggestible
minds. There are people so constituted as to be
able to produce symptoms of any described kind
with the least application, and with practically DO
spiritual effect upon themselves or their mental
or moral nature, and certainly no progress in that
path which leads to the knowledge of the higher
Self. Silence with reference to symptoms and re-
sults is therefore most desirable.

7=7== ?"7"'7::
CHAPTER FIVE
fi'iiHE formula of the Middle Pillar has many
U and varied uses. It serve~ ~s an excellent
. prelude to any type of spmtual work. For
those whose penchant or principal interest is the
art of meditation as the supreme means of placing
themselves in alignment with the higher Self, no
better opening to that meditation could be found.
It also serves, as suggested above, as the only
worth-while preparation for serious magical work.
It is that technique which generates the magical
power which by its presence spells success in the
routine of Ceremonial or Ritual Magic. Those who
have not applied themselves to this practice - or
have not stumbled upon its essential core by acci-
dent, as very often happens - are certainly not
those who have in any way proved the efficacy of
the art of Ceremonial. They believe that the ulti-
mate factor which confers success is anyone of a
thousand things save this particular preliminary
111
one. We read in some authoritative tomes that
the factor in question is the whirling dance, or
music played by violin or harp, the mystical cir-
cumambulation or the mental spasm sometimes
caused by invocation or adoration. In practice,
however, should any of these routines succeed in
producing the requisite and longed for result, it
is, as it were, in spite of themselves. That is to say,
they are purely secondary and subordinate tech-
niques. Their method is hit or miss, and does not
rest upon a sound basis of attainment nor upon a
sure understanding of magical principles. The prac-
tice of the Middle Pillar is the introductory or
preparatory means of aligning the personality with
the inner self, of identifying and unifying all the
levels of the true consciousness which we, in our
complacency and blindness, choose to call the
Unconscious.
Reverting back to the technical side of things,
there is yet another development of the Middle
Pillar which requires description. Having been
awakened from latency into some degree of activ-
ity, it is necessary that the power that the centres
generate should be circulated through the invisible
or psychic system. Failure to do this is, in my
estimation, one of the most potent sources of ner-
vous trouble and disturbance experienced by dab-
blers in occultism, who have experimented with
various amateur or incompletely delineated meth-
ods of awakening the psychic centres. The energy
I3 Z
thus awakened streams back and forth from the
centre. But unless some method is devised for dis-
tributing it and thus relieving the pressure, the
centre itself will in the course of time suffer de-
rangement through over-stimulus, and there is
bound to ensue some serious disturbance to the
nervous and psychic system. Nervous breakdowns
have been common-place amongst those who have
unwisely attempted these things on insufficient
knowledge, and neuroses have reaped a timely and
bounteous harvest among students of the occult.
With every one of the five centres active and
throwing power into the mind and body, and there
is a clear awareness of an actual column extending
interiorly from the crown of the head to the soles
of the feet, an entirely different technique must
now be pursued. The student should return to the
contemplation of his KESER, the lamp of invisible
light above the head. Imagining this centre still to
be in a state of radiation, let him will that its
energy circulates through the system in this wise.
It descends from the head towards the left shoul-
der. Passing through the entire length of the left
side of the body, the magnetic current strikes the
sole of the left foot. Thence it passes over to the
right sole, upwards through the leg and thigh and
body to the right shoulder, eventually returning
to KESER.
Possibly this may sound fantastic to some read-
ers. Impossible and incredible to others. But the
133
fact remains that it can be done and simply too.
It requires, above all, to be attempted in the spirit
of honest investigation and tried again and again
until the current of energy responds to the firm
command of the will, thus following the course
directed. Once clearly commanded, the current
flows in that direction quite automatically and on
its own momentum. The mind, naturally, must be
calm and concentrated, not prone to wander off
into pleasant excursions on the day's events.
In this way, a great deal of the power generated
is circulated through every particle of the body, so
that each of these cells feels alive as never it has
felt before. This, be it remembered, quite apart
from the enhancement of the general field of con-
sciousness. What I have described may be called
for clarity's sake the formula of Circulation Num-
ber One.
It is now necessary to circulate the stream of
power in yet another direction. The object is to
ensure that no single area of the sphere of sensation
be omitted from its vitalising and cleansing pas-
sage. Once again returning to the vision of the light
above the head, this time imagine and will that the
current of spiritual power descends from KESER
in a forward direction. That is to say, it passes
downward in front of the face, descending through
that region along the neck and chest, down the
thighs to the feet. When it strikes the thighs, the
stream turns backward along the soles of the feet,
I34
along the calves at the back, ascending the spinal
column and neck until, once more, it reaches
KESER. Both this formula and the preceding one
should be repeated several times, until they become
quite simple. The process should be accompanied
by the rhythmic breath, so that the descending
current coincides with the exhalation of breath,
while the ascending current accompanies the in-
halation. It is really very easy, and it is only the
description of it which sounds involved and com-
plex. This formula we will call Circulation Num-
ber Two.
The third formula of circulation is rather differ-
ent. The two preceding methods will be discovered
to have produced wheels of power spinning around
the periphery of the aura or sphere of sensation at
right angles, as it were. The third formula is more
akin to the motion of a spiral. Having returned on
each of the former occasions of circulation to the
contemplation of KESER, imagine the upright
column of brilliance, corresponding to the Middle
Pillar, formulated through the centre of the body.
Pass now to the visualisation of MALKUS eman-
ating its inherent power of stability and equilib-
rium and fertility. Perhaps the easiest way to
conceive of the motion of the third formula is to
imagine the act of swathing or bandaging a leg.
You wrap the gauze tightly around the lower part
of the limb, gradually ascending the leg in closely
wound spirals. This, simply, is the technique of the
ISS
formula under consideration. You should imagine
a ray of power coming out from the right side of
MALKUS, moving over to the left foot. Here it
descends under the legs, and comes up on the right
a little higher up the spiraL Repeat the same move-
ment again and again, until eventually you feel
the distinct sensation of a whirling of spiritual
power which gradually rises from the feet to the
thighs, its spiral-current still fairly close and con-
nected, over-lapping those immediately below.
From the thighs, the whirling or spiral proceeds
up the trunk tightly enwrapping or enswathing it
with a bandage of pure white light. This continues,
until once more the current returns to rest in
KESER. This completes the formulae of circum-
ambulation, as the method is sometimes called.
These circulatory movements will be referred to
again later, and the student is asked to pay spe-
cial attention to them.
The Chinese yoga instruction The Secret of the
Golden Flower, has a sentence or two which is very
apposite to this technique of the mystical circum-
ambulations: "Therefore when the Light circu-
lates, the powers of the whole body arrange them-
selves before its throne, just as when a holy king
has taken possession of the capital and has laid
down the fundamental rules of order, all the states
approach with tribute .... Therefore you only have
to make the Light circulate; that is the deepest and
most wonderful secret. The Light is easy to move,
13 6
but difficult to fix. If it is allowed to go long enough
in a circle, then it crystallises itself; that is the na-
tural spirit-body. This crystallised spirit is formed
beyond the nine Heavens. It is the condition of
which it is said in the Book of the Seal of the
Heart: silently in the morning thou illest upward."
To summarise the practice, the Middle Pillar
consists of several phrases. There is the prelimin-
ary establishment of a rhythmical intake and ex-
halation of breath. The formulation of the five
centres on the Middle Pillar, each one separately.
And finally, the several formulae for the distribu-
tion of the power thus generated.
As one becomes more and more familiar with
this process with the passage of time, the practice
being continued daily, little artistic flourishes as
it were may be introduced to enhance its efficiency
and assist the process of interior development.
Some caution, naturally, is needed. Common sense
is essential. The student does not wish to generate
or open himself to more power than easily he can
accommodate. This would prove, if not dangerous,
then quite useless. For one thing, it would impede
his own development and progress.
The additions referred to are the colours of each
centre to be visualised whilst vibrating the name.
This notably changes and stimulates the reaction
of the Sephirah. Care is needed, and that is why it
is recommended that for months the student
should not apply himself to this colour scheme,
137
contenting himself exclusively with the visualisa-
tion of the light-centres as white in colour. KESER
is of pure white brilliance, and the rays that it
emits and radiates upon the personality are of the
same hue. Lavender-blue is the colour that is tra-
ditionally associated with DAAS. TIPHARAS is
gold, whilst YESOD is purple or puce.
It is when we approach the consideration of the
MALKUS colour that we experience some diffi-
culty. Tradition gives us several scales of colour
all of which are of equal efficacy. The sphere of
MALKUS is divided by two diagonals into four
sections; citrine at the top, black at the bottom,
with russet and olive occupying the two side sec-
tions. More simply, it is sometimes useful to visual-
ise this Sephirah solely as a jet black sphere, or
yet again as of a dark green colour. The student
must suit himself here, finding out by practice
which visualisation produces the best results.
When he has pursued such a practice for many
months, let him extend the scope of his efforts to
the formulation not only of the Middle Pillar, but
the Sephiros of the two side columns as well. By
doing this, he formulates within the Sphere of
Sensation the three Pillars of the complete Tree of
Life. The technique and the procedure to be fol-
lowed is precisely that delineated with regard to
the Sephiros of the Middle Pillar. The only gap
in the student's knowledge are the divine Names
138
of the Sephiros of the two side Pillars, and these I
give below together with the appropriate colours.
When there is much time at the student's dis-
posal, and when he has won sufficient confidence
in his ability, an additional aid is to employ the
archangelic names in addition to the divine Names
with the several centres. For example, when visual-
ising TIPHARAS as a glowing golden sphere, he
will slowly vibrate three or four times the Name
YHVH ALOAH ve-DAAS. Then he will pause
while concentrating on the sphere. He will connive
to realize in full consciousness the implications of
this sphere - its attributions with regard to as-
trological planets, its spiritual qualities, and its
relation to his own divine consciousness. This medi-
tation performed, let him commence to vibrate in
the same way and the same number of times the
arch angelic name of RAPHAEL, again extending
the meditation to realise that the latter name
means divine healing. It implies that light which
descends with "healing in its wings." And so on
for the remaining centres.
Below are the names attributed to each Sephirah
of the Tree of Life, their archangels, the appropri-
ate region of the body in which they are to be
visualised, and the colour of the visualisation: -
139
I.
Keser Ahih Metatron Crown of head White
2. Chokmah Yoh Raziel Left side of brain Grey
3. Binah Yhvh Tzaphkiel Right side of brain Black
Daas YhvhAlhim Nape of neck Lavender-blue
4-
Chesed
AI
Tzadkiel Left shoulder Blue
...
~
s.
Gevurah Alhim Gbor Kamael Right shoulder Red
6. Tipharas Yhvh Aloah ve Daas Raphael Heart Gold
7. Netzach Yhvh Tzavoos Hanael Left hip Green
8. Hod Alhim Tzavoos Michael Right hip Orange
9. Yesod Shaddai AI Chai Gabriel Genitals Puce10.
Malkus Adonai ha-Aretz Sandalphon Feet Mixed colours
It will be noticed that the attributions of DAAS
are deficient in an archangelic name. This is be-
cause the sphere is, in reality, no part of the tra-
ditional Tree of Life. The latter consists of ten
spheres only, and it was with these ten spheres
that the ancients occupied themselves and pro-
vided the necessary correspondences. The philos-
ophy appertaining to DAAS is almost entirely a
modern one. But there is another mediaeval sys-
tem which, attached to this Qabalistic system,
provides us with an invocation of the element
Spirit. A great deal of research on this was done
by Dr. John Dee and his skryer Edward Kelly,
both of whom called it the Angelic or Enochian
system. My experience confirms that the archan-
gelic names contained in one of these very potent
magical invocations are very sympathetic to the
nature of DAAS, which is described as a link be-
tween the ego and the Higher Self. These names
may very logically be attributed to DM,S and be
used with it. They are Elexarpeh, Comananu, and
Tabitom. The method of vibrating these archan-
gelic names is to split each one into syllables, each
one receiving the maximum amount of vibration.
Let care be taken so that the vibration detonates
solely in DAAS.
The Middle Pillar as already described, together
with the formulae of circulation, constitutes the
first half of this particular formula. The other half
is denominated The Vibratory Formula of the
141
Middle Pillar. To perform it properly presupposes
a great deal of familiarity with the results to be
obtained from the Middle Pillar and the complete
Tree of Life exercise. It, however, proceeds a stage
further. The former exercise devoted itself solely
to awakening the centres considered as psycho-
physical symbols or co-relatives of various princi-
ples operating within the psyche.
The Vibratory Formula, so called, envisages an-
other goal. Its object, once the interior Sephiros
have been established and some awareness ob-
tained of the principles they represent, is to ally
or connect up those psychological principles to
their replicas in the Collective Unconscious. The
traditional magical theory is that since man is a
reproduction in miniature of the universe, his own
interior constitution must be modelled on the pat-
tern of the larger universe of the Collective U ncon-
scious. Just as the individual Unconscious is not,
as we have seen, a simple unit but comprises s~v
eral constituents, so also the Collective Uncon-
scious. Moreover, the tradition holds that by
awakening any principle within, or by becoming
conscious of any factor operative within the psyche,
it is possible by an extension of the sphere of its
operation to tap the corresponding aspect of that
centre or psyche in the Collective sphere. The
deeper levels of the Collective Unconscious bear
to the individual Unconscious the same relationship
as do the deepest levels of the latter to the con-
142
scious thinking ego. That is, they comprise the
root and hidden sources of life, integrity and il-
lumination. It is the equilibriated realisation of
these sources of life which make the difference
between the enlightened man and the ignorant one.
And these roots are the sources of life upon which
the whole of existence in all its aspects depends.
Since Magic has as its avowed intention the dis-
covery of the Higher Self, and then to associate
that Higher Self with the rest of the spiritual
nature in a mood of co-operation, one way of
accomplishing this co-operation is to connect de-
liberately the levels of the individual Unconscious
with the different planes of the Collective Uncon-
scious. The result of the acceptance of the exist-
ence of the personal Unconscious acts as a solvent
of the habitual resistances to its free operation.
Therefore, co-operation with that part of Nature,
the Higher Self, is the implication of that accep-
tance. Likewise the acceptance of the Collective
Unconscious in the manner described, with the
realisation that the whole of life is an indissoluble
unity, accordingly raises that conscious co-opera-
tion to a higher and much more deliberate level.
It removes evolution from the purely personal
alignment with Nature, to a realisation of the di-
vine object of individual existence. With it comes
the intuition in full consciousness how best that
object may be fulfilled in relation to all other men
and to life as a whole.
143
If I describe its technique, some understanding
perhaps of its purposes may be divined. It presup-
poses, as said, some familiarity with the Middle
Pillar. It demands, moreover, that the Middle Pil-
lar should be in active formulation as an interior
column of brilliance at the particular moment
when the Vibratory Formula is to be employed.
The student, then, begins to visualise in the at-
mosphere before hlm the Name of that particular
Sephirah which represents the level of conscious-
ness he proposes to deal with.
I must here interpolate that traditionally the
letters of the Hebrew Alphabet were employed for
the purposes of this visualisation. But I see no
reason why the ordinary person should be obliged
to burden himself with the necessity of studying
Hebrew for this purpose. In the case of the serious
student who wishes to make a profound study of
the Qabalah from a purely magical point of view,
and wishes to engage in the full ceremonial and
ritual aspects of this tradition, I should be the
first to insist that Hebrew be made a part of his
curriculum. It would enter into every department
of Magic, in its wider implication, that he would
touch. For the average student, however, English
or Roman letters may be just as well employed.
And I recommend that in the visualisation only
the consonants corresponding to the appropriate
Hebrew characters of a Name be employed, not
the vowels. That is why in the rubric of the Penta-
144
gram Ritual, and in the table of Correspondences
above, I have spelt the divine Names in consonan-
tal form only. The pronounciation of them is pro-
vided elsewhere.
The Name visualised in Roman letters in the air,
let the student imagine that he has drawn these
letters into the lungs by means of a deep inspira-
tion of air. The Names should be visualised in
flames; in flames corresponding in colour to the
Sephirah being employed. That is to say, if it be
the fifth Sephirah, the Name should be visualised
in scarlet and vivid red flame. But if the seventh
Sephirah is being considered, the Name ought to
be formulated as in an emerald green of surpassing
brilliance and clarity.
The Name having been inhaled into the lungs
by means of an inspiration, it should be silently
and powerfully vibrated, the entire attention being
concentrated upon this to the exclusion of all else.
While in the lungs, the white light of the KESER
ought to be felt descending upon the Name, con-
secrating it to the service of the higher Self. Then
the Name should be visualised, whilst the breath
is retained, as descending from the lungs via the
Middle Pillar to the feet. Here it should be again
vibrated very powerfully. When the entire Tree of
Life within is pulsating sympathetically to this
vibration, the Name rises rapidly once more to
the lungs where once more it is subjected to a
silent vibration.
145
The exhalation of the breath accompanies an
audible vibration of the Name. It also accompanies
a gesture to be made which consists of two move-
ments. The first is the placing of the left foot about
six to twelve inches forward. The second is the
raising of both hands to the side of the head, on
a level with the eyes, and then flinging them for-
ward as though to project a force emanating from
within. As the arms are flung forward, the exhala-
tion and powerful vibration aloud of the Name
takes place. This gesture is called the Projecting
Sign. The visualised Name should be perceived as
going forward in space until it strikes as it were
against the confines of the universe. Here it gathers
power, from the infinity of the Void, as it were,
whence it commences to surge backwards in the
mind's eye upon the student.
Some seconds after the projection and audible
vibration of the Name the student should bring
his left foot sharply back, and after dropping both
hands to the side, raise the forefinger of the left
hand to his lips. This is called the Protecting Sign,
or sign of silence. It is the traditional gesture of
the Egyptian God Harpocrates - one of the sym-
bols employed to represent the holy child that
grew from the union of the two opposites. It thus
represents the growth, silent and unseen, of the
Golden Flower.
Whilst employing the sign of silence, the student
should contrive to imagine that the Name which
146
has been projected by the first Sign to the outer
limits of space, surges back upon him, penetrating
him through and through. His whole being should
be flooded with a divine light, and a sense of
ecstasy should overwhelm the mind and vision.
Standing quietly in this sign, the practitioner
should meditate upon the spiritual value involved
in the nature of the Name he has used. There
should dawn upon his mind by direct perception
an understanding and a wide sympathy with that
spiritual power to which he has opened himself
and which now flows unimpeded through him. It is
often accompanied at first by a complete blank-out
of every faculty of the mind, so that for at least
some seconds one is lost utterly to oneself. It seems
that in that brief moment we are swung forcibly
across the gulf of the Abyss into another and di-
viner region by the vibratory momentum of the
power of the Name. It is a distinct recognition of,
and participation in, that type of experience which
has variously been called mystical and religious.
It is a rare and holy event for the individual ceases,
it may be for but a single instant of time, to be
a man. He is caught up in a diviner sphere, and
is enwrapped by the transcendental folds of the
descending tongues of the spirit. For but a moment
or two only - for the very nature of consciousness,
with its feeble instrument the brain, is such as to
be unable to endure for very long this white heat
of ecstacy. And then once more the ego, dazed and
147
stunned by so awe-inspiring and terrific an experi-
ence, recovers its equilibrium, resumes its normal
function, and asserts itself once more. But the na-
ture of that consciousness is never the same after-
wards. It has changed in that an impression of
higher things is left, a sense of exaltation and of
expansion. It dimly understands that godhead has
descended into its sphere, and that it has been
raised into divinity.
It must be understood that this technique is ap-
plicable to any of the Names belonging to the Ten
Sephiros. And moreover, it must also be clearly
understood that the vibration should be repeated
several times as described, and that the three for-
mulae of circumambulation or circulation must be
employed with this Vibratory formula as they
were with the Middle Pillar.
One authority on Magic describes the effect
thus: "It is a sign that the student is performing
this correctly when a single vibration entirely ex-
hausts his physical strength. It should cause him
to grow hot all over or to perspire violently, and
it should so weaken him that he will find it difficult
to remain standing. It is a sign of success, though
only by the student himself is it perceived, when
he hears the Name of the God vehemently roared
forth, as if by the concourse of ten thousand thun-
ders; and it should appear to him as if that Great
Voice proceeded from the Universe and not from
148
him. In the above practice all consciousness of
anything but the God-Name should be absolutely
blotted out; and the longer it takes his normal
perception to return, the better."
My own personal experience of this formula
while confirmatory, is not quite so drastic as the
above description would make out. Two or three
little hints may be given to the student which may
be helpful. The first of these is with regard to
breath-capacity. Shallow breathing renders the
Vibratory Formula null and void, or at any rate
of little value. It seems to confirm the yoga theory
of a certain relationship existing between the
breath and consciousness. The Western system as
such does not countenance or employ the Yoga
theory whereby the rate of breath is slowed down
in order to restrain the motion of the mind. But
from the physical point of view, which is valid in
its own sphere, those lungs which -are capable of
filling to their fullest capacity, and are capable
of retaining the breath for over thirty seconds, are
more likely to be useful for this formula than
weak and puny lungs.
Another important point is that the experiment
should be performed in as nearly an empty room
as possible. Or, where this is not practicable, all
heavy furniture should be cleared as far from
where the student stands as is compatible with the
size and arrangement of the room. The reason for
'49
this is simple. The sharp pang of ecstasy, the diz-
ziness induced by full inhalation and prolonged
retention, and the enormous power which this Vi-
bratory Formula generates are so tremendous that
until the student accustoms himself to it by fre-
quent repetition, he may find himself incapacitated
for a second or two. The perspiration by the way
induced by this practice is a peculiar one, being
very similar in consistency and odour to that gen-
erated by Pranayama of the Yoga system.
The incapacity experienced is such that he may,
while lost to himself, stumble forward and fall. If,
during the practice, the fall is to be encouraged,
then it is as well that it should be on to a carpet
or something soft. It would spoil the effect of the
practice were the student to break up the induced
state of consciousness by casting his eye about
anxiously and with fear in order to avoid doing
himself a physical injury by hitting some piece
of furniture.
When the practice however has been repeated
some dozen times or so, the entire psychic and
physical system becomes accustomed to the severe
strain imposed upon it without manifesting any
sign of weakness. The student will find himself
enabled to make the Sign of Silence without falling
or stumbling, even though the surge of power
within him may feel unbearable, and the ravish-
ment of ecstasy too intolerable to stand. But "Wis-
150
dom says be strong. Then canst thou bear more
joy. Be not animal; refine thy rapture."
Repetition and becoming accustomed to the
mental and spiritual phenomena induced by the
formula makes the ecstasy more bearable and en-
ables one to become strong in that spiritual joy,
and capable of resisting the physical symptoms
of weakness.
There are innumerable other techniques which
are included under the comprehensive term Magic:
Divination, clairvoyance, astral projection, God-
forms and many others. The only matter requiring
some few words here is that of Ceremonial. "But
the principles underlying thjs are so simple that
the student who has understood the psychological
principles laid down earlier in the book will have"
no difficulty in understanding its function. The
purpose of Ceremonial is that of all magic - the
awakening of the interior man, the aligning it with
the consciousness and powers of the universe about
him. Its method, though, seems to the novice
slightly different from the others. Actually, how-
ever, its procedure is identical with the other tech-
niques, except that it brings them down to the
physical plane. That is to say, instead of perform-
ing a series of purely introverted exercises, Cere-
monial Magic devotes itself to enacting on the
physical plane a series of psychic events. That is
to say, it combines, according to its own principles,
lSI
the benefits of introversion with those of the ex-
traverted temperament.
We have seen that the ten Sephiros represent
different principles in man. The former chapters
have described various methods of dealing with
these constituents and with bringing them into
operation. Ceremonial Magic would apply itself
to this problem of the manifestation of interior
psychological principles in this way. It would take
a room or Temple, and so arrange it as to represent
either the Tree of Life as a whole, or some par-
ticular aspect of a portion of it. The philosophy
of the diagrammatic Tree is explained in various
Qabalistic works, and an understanding of that
would determine the arrangement employed. Cer-
tain stations would be set up in the Temple, with
officers placed there to represent the activity and
operation. of a certain Sephirah. Thus a Ceremony,
if it has been arranged by individuals who were
thoroughly conversant with magical principles and
with the basic principles of the Tree of Life, would
be a celebration in dramatic form of the powers
of these ten Sephiros. The celebration of it physi-
cally, with each officer aware of the Sephirah rep-
resented and knowing how to bring the power of
that Sephirah into operation either by the Vibra-
tory Formula or by the assumption of the tradi-
tional God-form ascribed to that Sephirah, will
have made available an enormous amount of
power. The penetration of this spiritual force into
ISZ
the sphere of sensation, and its reaction upon the
consciousness of all present, is likely to produce
a result in consciousness similar to, but much more
concentrated and powerful than, the effects of the
magical methods above described.
Little more need be said, but each student can
work out the idea more completely. A great deal
more material on the subject of Ceremonial Magic
may be found in my Tree of Life and The Golden
Dawn. But for the moment, my remarks may be
limited to the above. And I must again emphasize
what has been reiterated through the entire length
of these pages. Ceremonial Magic will avail the
student nothing, and be of no practical use to him
at all, until he has applied himself with great sin-
cerity and application to the simpler practices
delineated above. The Pentagram Ritual, the
Qabalistic Cross and the Middle Pillar comprise
the simple steps to spiritual development. It is
only when these steps have been taken, and skill
in their performance achieved, that he may feel it
right and proper to approach that great edifice of
Ceremonial Magic which is like a ladder, the bot-
tom rung of which is rooted upon the earth so
that all may climb quite easily. Its heights, how-
ever, are lost in the clouds of spiritual attainment
where none may go until he has accomplished all
that is possible here and now, and until he has
integrated himself through .and through. As has so
often been stated here, I consider that Analytical
153
Psychology must be regarded as the first part of
that onward journey to the heights at the end of
the distant plains. Not until the mind and the
emotional system have been cleansed and unified
by the cathartic process of Psycho-therapy, can
the full spiritual benefits of magical work be re-
flected into the mind of man.
STAY IN TOUCH
On the following pages you will find listed, with their current prices,
some of the books and tapes now available on related subjects. Your book
dealer stocks most of these, and will stock new titles in the llewellyn
series as they become available. We urge your patronage.
However, to obtain our full catalog, to keep informed of new titles as they
are released and to benefit from informative articles and helpful news,
you are invited to write for our bi-monthly news magazine/catalog. A
sample copy is free, and it will continue coming to you at no cost as long
as you are an active mail customer. Or you may keep it coming for a full
year with a donation of just $2.00 in U.S.A. ($7.00 for Canada &: Mexico,
$10.00 overseas, first class mail). Many bookstores also have The I1ewellyn
New Times available to their customers. Ask for it
Stay in touch! In The Llewellyn New Times' pages you will find news and
reviews of new books, tapes and services, announcements of meetings
and seminars, articles helpful to our readers, news of authors, advertis-
ing of products and services, special money-making opportunities, and
much more.
The Llewellyn New Times
P.O. Box 64383-Dept. 658, St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
• • •
TO ORDER BOOKS AND TAPES
If your book dealer does not have the books and tapes described on the
following pages readily available, you may order them direct from the
publisher by sending full price in U.S. funds , plus $1.00 for handling and
50¢ each book or item for postage within the United States; outside USA
surface mail add $1.00 extra per item. Outside USA air mail add $7.00 per
item.
FOR GROUP STUDY AND PURCHASE
Because there is a great deal of interest in group discussion and study of
the subject matter of this book, we feel that we should encourage the
adoption and use of this particular book by such groups by offering a
special "quantity" price to group leaders or "agents".
Our Special Quantity Price for a minimum order of five copies of TIm
MIDDLE PILlAR is $20.85 Cash-With-Order. This price includes p0s-
tage and handling within the United States. Minnesota residents must
add 6% sales tax. For additional quantities, please order in multiples of
five. For Canadian and foreign orders, add postage and handling charges
as above. Credit Card (VISA, MasterCard, American Express, Diners'
Club) Orders are accepted. Charge Card Orders only may be phoned
free ($15.00 minimum order) within the U.S.A. by dialing 1-800-THE
MOON (in Canada call: 1-800-FOR-SELF). Customer Service calls dial
1-612-291-1970. Mail Orders to:
LLEWELLYN PUBLICATIONS
P.O. Box 64383-Dept. 658/ St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
Also by Israel Regardie
A GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES
"The two main methods of the traditional and esoteric Qabalah are
Meditation (Yoga) and Practical Qabalah (Magick). By Yoga is meant
that rigorous system of mental and self discipline which has as its primary
aim the absolute and complete control of the thinking principle, the Ruach,
the ultimate object being to obtain the faculty with which to still the stream
of thought at will, so that that which is behind (as it were), or above, or
beyond the mind can manifest on to the stillness thus produced The
quiescence of the mental turbulence is the primary essential. With this
faculty at 'command, the student is taught to exalt the mind by various
technical methods ofMagick until it overrides the normal limitations and
barriers of its nature, ascending in a tremendous unquenchable column of
flfc>-like ecstasy to the Universal Consciousness, with which it becomes
united Once having become at one with transcendental Existence, it
intuitively partakes of universal knowledge, which is considered to be a
more reliable source of information than the rational introspection of the
intellect or the experimental scientific investigation of matter can give."
In this unique textbook we have one of the fmest and most lucid
introductions to the study of Qabalah available. Written when Regardie
was only twenty-four years old, it served him as a yardstick against which
he could measure his own progress. It is comprised of his own notes,
combining the works of Aleister Crowley, A.E. Waite, Eliphas Levi and
D.H. Lawrence. The many diagrams and tables of defmitions and
correspondences are designed to simplify the student's grasp of the
complex system and provide a guide to Qabalistic symbolism.
This book further provides an introduction to the Qabalistic foundation of
the Golden Dawn and the practices of Magick and meditation in the
Western Esoteric system. For centuries the mystical Qabalah has been
used by Jews, Christians, Arabs and others as a guide to understanding the
Universe and our place within it Hundreds of magicians and mystics have
considered the Qabalah to be the most efficient plan ever devised for
classifying and organizing the characteristics of the Cosmos and the self.
ISBN 0-87542-690-5, Second Edition, Revised, 5th printing. US $6.95
